<|book_start|>
CHAPTER ONE No one can deny that Chief the Honourable M.A. Nanga, M.P., was the most approachable politician in the country. Whether you asked in the city or in his home village, Anata, they would tell you he was a man of the people. I have to admit this from the onset or else the story I'm going to tell will make no sense. That afternoon he was due to address the staff and students of the Anata Grammar School where I was teaching at the time. But as usual in those highly political times the villagers moved in and virtually took over. The Assembly Hall must have carried well over thrice its capacity. Many villagers sat on the floor, right up to the foot of the dais. I took one look and decided it was just as well we had to stay outside---at least for the moment. Five or six dancing groups were performing at different points in the compound. The popular 'Ego Women's Party' wore a new uniform of expensive accra cloth. In spite of the din you could still hear as clear as a bird the high- powered voice of their soloist, whom they admiringly nicknamed 'Grammarphone'. Personally I don't care too much for our women's dancing but you just had to listen whenever Grammar-phone sang. She was now praising Micah's handsomeness, which she likened to the perfect, sculpted beauty of a carved eagle, and his popularity which would be the envy of the proverbial traveller-to-distant-places who must not cultivate enmity on his route. Micah was of course Chief the Honourable M.A. Nanga, M.P. The arrival of the members of the hunters' guild in full regalia caused a great stir. Even Grammar-phone stopped ---at least for a while. These people never came out except at the funeral of one of their number, or during some very special and outstanding event. I could not remember when I last saw them. They wielded their loaded guns as though they were playthings. Now and again two of them would meet in warriors' salute and knock the barrel of their guns together from left to right and again from right to left. Mothers grabbed their children and hurriedly dragged them away. Occasionally a hunter would take aim at a distant palm branch and break its mid-rib. The crowd applauded. But there were very few such shots. Most of the hunters reserved their precious powder to greet the Minister's arrival---the price of gunpowder like everything else having doubled again and again in the four years since this government took control. As I stood in one corner of that vast tumult waiting for the arrival of the Minister I felt intense bitterness welling up in my mouth. Here were silly, ignorant villagers dancing themselves lame and waiting to blow off their gunpowder in honour of one of those who had started the country off down the slopes of inflation. I wished for a miracle, for a voice of thunder, to hush this ridiculous festival and tell the poor contemptible people one or two truths. But of course it would be quite useless. They were not only ignorant but cynical. Tell them that this man had used his position to enrich himself and they would ask you---as my father did---if you thought that a sensible man would spit out the juicy morsel that good fortune placed in his mouth. I had not always disliked Mr Nanga. Sixteen years or so ago he had been my teacher in standard three and I something like his favourite pupil. I remember him then as a popular, young and handsome teacher, most impressive in his uniform as scoutmaster. There was on one of the walls of the school a painting of a faultlessly handsome scoutmaster wearing an impeccable uniform. I am not sure that the art teacher who painted the picture had Mr Nanga in mind. There was no facial resemblance; still we called it the picture of Mr Nanga. It was enough that they were both handsome and that they were both impressive scoutmasters. This picture stood with arms folded across its chest and its raised right foot resting neatly and lightly on a perfectly cut tree stump. Bright red hibiscus flowers decorated the four corners of the frame; and below were inscribed the memorable words: Not what I have but what I do is my kingdom. That was in 1948. Nanga must have gone into politics soon afterwards and then won a seat in Parliament. (It was easy in those days---before we knew its cash price.) I used to read about him in the papers some years later and even took something like pride in him. At that time I had just entered the University and was very active in the Students' branch of the People's Organization Party. Then in 1960 something disgraceful happened in the Party and I was completely disillusioned. At that time Mr Nanga was an unknown back-bencher in the governing P. O. P. A general election was imminent. The P. O. P. was riding high in the country and there was no fear of its not being returned. Its opponent, the Progressive Alliance Party, was weak and disorganized. Then came the slump in the international coffee market. Overnight (or so it seemed to us) the Government had a dangerous financial crisis on its hands. Coffee was the prop of our economy just as coffee farmers were the bulwark of the P. O. P. The Minister of Finance at the time was a first-rate economist with a Ph. D. in public finance. He presented to the Cabinet a complete plan for dealing with the situation. The Prime Minister said 'No' to the plan. He was not going to risk losing the election by cutting down the price paid to coffee planters at that critical moment; the National Bank should be instructed to print fifteen million pounds. Two-thirds of the Cabinet supported the Minister. The next morning the Prime Minister sacked them and in the evening he broadcast to the nation. He said the dismissed ministers were conspirators and traitors who had teamed up with foreign saboteurs to destroy the new nation. I remember this broadcast very well. Of course no one knew the truth at that time. The newspapers and the radio carried the Prime Minister's version of the story. We were very indignant. Our Students' Union met in emergency session and passed a vote of confidence in the leader and called for a detention law to deal with the miscreants. The whole country was behind the leader. Protest marches and demonstrations were staged up and down the land. It was at this point that I first noticed a new, dangerous and sinister note in the universal outcry. The Daily Chronicle, an official organ of the P. O. P., had pointed out in an editorial that the Miscreant Gang, as the dismissed ministers were now called, were all university people and highly educated professional men. (I have preserved a cutting of that editorial.) Let us now and for all time extract from our body- politic as a dentist extracts a stinking tooth all those decadent stooges versed in text-book economics and aping the white man's mannerisms and way of speaking. We are proud to be Africans. Our true leaders are not those intoxicated with their Oxford, Cambridge or Harvard degrees but those who speak the language of the people. Away with the damnable and expensive university education which only alienates an African from his rich and ancient culture and puts him above his people.... This cry was taken up on all sides. Other newspapers pointed out that even in Britain where the Miscreant Gang got its 'so-called education' a man need not be an economist to be Chancellor of the Exchequer or a doctor to be Minister of Health. What mattered was loyalty to the party. I was in the public gallery the day the Prime Minister received his overwhelming vote of confidence. And that was the day the truth finally came out; only no one was listening. I remember the grief-stricken figure of the dismissed Minister of Finance as he led his team into the chamber and was loudly booed by members and the public. That week his car had been destroyed by angry mobs and his house stoned. Another dismissed minister had been pulled out of his car, beaten insensible, and dragged along the road for fifty yards, then tied hand and foot, gagged and left by the roadside. He was still in the orthopaedic hospital when the house met. That was my first---and last---visit to Parliament. It was also the only time I had set eyes on Mr Nanga again since he taught me in 1948. The Prime Minister spoke for three hours and his every other word was applauded. He was called the Tiger, the Lion, the One and Only, the Sky, the Ocean and many other names of praise. He said that the Miscreant Gang had been caught 'red-handed in their nefarious plot to overthrow the Government of the people by the people and for the people with the help of enemies abroad'. 'They deserve to be hanged,' shouted Mr Nanga from the back benches. This interruption was so loud and clear that it appeared later under his own name in the Hansard. Throughout the session he led the pack of back-bench hounds straining their leash to get at their victims. If any one had cared to sum up Mr Nanga's interruptions they would have made a good hour's continuous yelp. Perspiration poured down his face as he sprang up to interrupt or sat back to share in the derisive laughter of the hungry hyena. When the Prime Minister said that he had been stabbed in the back by the very ingrates he had pulled out of oblivion some members were in tears. 'They have bitten the finger with which their mother fed them,' said Mr Nanga. This too was entered in the Hansard, a copy of which I have before me. It is impossible, however, to convey in cold print the electric atmosphere of that day. I cannot now recall exactly what my feelings were at that point. I suppose I thought the whole performance rather peculiar. You must remember that at that point no one had any reason to think there might be another side to the story. The Prime Minister was still talking. Then he made the now famous (or infamous) solemn declaration: 'From today we must watch and guard our hard-won freedom jealously. Never again must we entrust our destiny and the destiny of Africa to the hybrid class of Westerneducated and snobbish intellectuals who will not hesitate to sell their mothers for a mess of pottage....' Mr Nanga pronounced the death sentence at least twice more but this was not recorded, no doubt because his voice was lost in the general commotion. I remember the figure of Dr Makinde the ex-Minister of Finance as he got up to speak---tall, calm, sorrowful and superior. I strained my ears to catch his words. The entire house, including the Prime Minister tried to shout him down. It was a most unedifying spectacle. The Speaker broke his mallet ostensibly trying to maintain order, but you could see he was enjoying the commotion. The public gallery yelled down its abuses. 'Traitor', 'Coward', 'Doctor of Fork your Mother'. This last was contributed from the gallery by the editor of the Daily Chronicle, who sat close to me. Encouraged, no doubt, by the volume of laughter this piece of witticism had earned him in the gallery he proceeded the next morning to print it in his paper. The spelling is his. Although Dr Makinde read his speech, which was clearly prepared, the Hansard later carried a garbled version which made no sense at all. It said not a word about the plan to mint fifteen million pounds---which was perhaps to be expected---but why put into Dr Makinde's mouth words that he could not have spoken? In short the Hansard boys wrote a completely new speech suitable to the boastful villain the ex-minister had become. For instance they made him say he was 'a brilliant economist whose reputation was universally acclaimed in Europe'. When I read this I was in tears---and I don't cry all that easily. The reason I have gone into that shameful episode in such detail is to establish the fact that I had no reason to be enthusiastic about Chief the Honourable M.A. Nanga who, seeing the empty ministerial seats, had yapped and snarled so shamelessly for the meaty prize. The Proprietor and Principal of the school was a thin, wiry fellow called Jonathan Nwege. He was very active in politics at the local council level and was always grumbling because his services to the P. O. P. had not been rewarded with the usual prize-appointment to some public corporation or other. But though disgruntled he had not despaired, as witness his elaborate arrangements for the present reception. Perhaps he was hoping for something in the proposed new corporation which would take over the disposal of all government unserviceable property (like old mattresses, chairs, electric fans, disused typewriters and other junk) which at present was auctioned by civil servants. I hope he gets appointed. It would have the merit of removing him from the school now and again. He insisted that the students should mount a guard of honour stretching from the main road to the school door. And the teachers too were to stand in a line at the end of the student queue, to be introduced. Mr Nwege who regularly read such literature as 'Toasts---How to Propose Them' was very meticulous about this kind of thing. I had objected vehemently to this standing like school children at our staff meeting, thinking to rouse the other teachers. But the teachers in that school were all dead from the neck up. My friend and colleague Andrew Kadibe found it impossible to side with me because he and the Minister came from the same village. Primitive loyalty, I call it. As soon as the Minister's Cadillac arrived at the head of a long motorcade the hunters dashed this way and that and let off their last shots, throwing their guns about with frightening freedom. The dancers capered and stamped, filling the dry-season air with dust. Not even Grammar- phone's voice could now be heard over the tumult. The Minister stepped out wearing damask and gold chains and acknowledging cheers with his ever-present fan of animal skin which they said fanned away all evil designs and shafts of malevolence thrown at him by the wicked. The man was still as handsome and youthful-looking as ever---there was no doubt about that. The Proprietor was now introducing him to the teachers beginning with the Senior Tutor at the head of the line. Although I had not had time to scrutinize the Senior Tutor's person I had no doubt he had traces of snuff as usual in his nostrils. The Minister had a jovial word for everyone. You could never think---looking at him now---that his smile was anything but genuine. It seemed bloody-minded to be sceptical. Now it was my turn. I held out my hand somewhat stiffly. I did not have the slightest fear that he might remember me and had no intention of reminding him. Our hands met. I looked him straight in the face. The smile slowly creased up into lines of thought. He waved his left hand impatiently to silence the loquacious Proprietor who had begun the parrot formula he had repeated at least fifteen times so far: 'I have the honour, sir, to introduce...' 'That's right,' said the Minister not to anyone in particular, but to some mechanism of memory inside his head. 'You are Odili.' 'Yes, sir.' Before the words were out of my mouth he had thrown his arms round me smothering me in his voluminous damask. 'You have a wonderful memory,' I said. 'It's at least fifteen years...' He had now partly released me although his left hand was resting on my shoulder. He turned slightly to the Proprietor and announced proudly: 'I taught him in...' 'Standard three,' I said. 'That's right,' he shouted. If he had just found his long- lost son he could not have been more excited. 'He is one of the pillars of this school,' said the Proprietor, catching the infection and saying the first good word about me since I had joined his school. 'Odili, the great,' said the Minister boyishly, and still out of breath. 'Where have you been all this time?' I told him I had been to the University, and had been teaching for the last eighteen months. 'Good boy!' he said. 'I knew he would go to a university. I use to tell the other boys in my class that Odili will one day be a great man and they will be answering him sir, sir. Why did you not tell me when you left the University? That's very bad of you, you know.' 'Well,' I said happily---I'm ashamed to admit---'I know how busy a minister...' 'Busy? Nonsense. Don't you know that minister means servant? Busy or no busy he must see his master.' Everybody around applauded and laughed. He slapped me again on the back and said I must not fail to see him at the end of the reception. 'If you fail I will send my orderly to arrest you.' I became a hero in the eyes of the crowd. I was dazed. Everything around me became suddenly unreal; the voices receded to a vague border zone. I knew I ought to be angry with myself but I wasn't. I found myself wondering whether---perhaps---I had been applying to politics stringent standards that didn't belong to it. When I came back to the immediate present I heard the Minister saying to another teacher: 'That is very good. Sometimes I use to regret ever leaving the teaching field. Although I am a minister today I can swear to God that I am not as happy as when I was a teacher.' My memory is naturally good. That day it was perfect. I don't know how it happened, but I can recall every word the Minister said on that occasion. I can repeat the entire speech he made later. 'True to God who made me,' he insisted. 'I use to regret it. Teaching is a very noble profession.' At this point everybody just collapsed with laughter not least of all the Honourable Minister himself, nor me, for that matter. The man's assurance was simply unbelievable. Only he could make such a risky joke---or whatever he thought he was making---at. that time, when teachers all over the country were in an ugly, rebellious mood. When the laughter died down, he put on a more serious face and confided to us: 'You can rest assured that those of us in the Cabinet who were once teachers are in full sympathy with you.' 'Once a teacher always a teacher,' said the Senior Tutor, adjusting the sleeves of his faded 'bottom-box' robes. 'Hear! hear!' I said. I like to think that I meant it to be sarcastic. The man's charism had to be felt to be believed. If I were superstitious I would say he had made a really potent charm of the variety called 'sweet face'. Changing the subject slightly, the Minister said, 'Only teachers can make this excellent arrangement.' Then turning to the newspaper correspondent in his party he said, 'It is a mammoth crowd.' The journalist whipped out his note-book and began to write. 'It is an unprecedented crowd in the annals of Anata,' said Mr Nwege. 'James, did you hear that?' the Minister asked the journalist. 'No, sir, what is it?' 'This gentleman says it is the most unprecedented crowd in the annals of Anata,' I said. This time I clearly meant my tongue to be in my cheek. 'What is the gentleman's name?' Mr Nwege called his name and spelt it and gave his full title of 'Principal and Proprietor of Anata Grammar School'. Then he turned to the Minister in an effort to pin-point responsibility for the big crowds. 'I had to visit every section of the village personally to tell them of your---I mean to say of the Minister's---visit.' We had now entered the Assembly Hall and the Minister and his party were conducted to their seats on the dais. The crowd raised a deafening shout of welcome. He waved his fan to the different parts of the hall. Then he turned to Mr Nwege and said: 'Thank you very much, thank you, sir.' A huge, tough-looking member of the Minister's entourage who stood with us at the back of the dais raised his voice and said: 'You see wetin I de talk. How many minister fit hanswer sir to any Tom, Dick and Harry wey senior them for age? I hask you how many?' Everyone at the dais agreed that the Minister was quite exceptional in this respect---a man of high position who still gave age the respect due to it. No doubt it was a measure of my changed---or shall we say changing?---attitude to the Minister that I found myself feeling a little embarrassed on his account for these fulsome praises flung at his face. 'Minister or no minister,' he said, 'a man who is my senior must still be my senior. Other ministers and other people may do otherwise but my motto is: Do the right and shame the Devil.' Somehow I found myself admiring the man for his lack of modesty. For what is modesty but inverted pride? We all think we are first-class people. Modesty forbids us from saying so ourselves though, presumably, not from wanting to hear it from others. Perhaps it was their impatience with this kind of hypocrisy that made men like Nanga successful politicians while starry-eyed idealists strove vaingloriously to bring into politics niceties and delicate refinements that belonged elsewhere. While I thought about all this---perhaps not in these exact terms---the fulsome praises flowed all around the dais. Mr Nwege took the opportunity to mount his old hobbyhorse. The Minister's excellent behaviour, he said, was due to the sound education he had received when education was education. 'Yes,' said the Minister, 'I use to tell them that standard six in those days is more than Cambridge today.' 'Cambridge?' asked Mr Nwege who, like the Minister, had the good old standard six. 'Cambridge? Who dash frog coat? You mean it is equal to B. A. today---if not more.' 'With due apologies,' said the Minister turning in my direction. 'Not at all, sir,' I replied with equal good humour. 'I am applying for a post-graduate scholarship to bring myself up to Mr Nwege's expectation.' I remember that at that point the beautiful girl in the Minister's party turned round on her chair to look at me. My eyes met hers and she quickly turned round again. I think the Minister noticed it. 'My private secretary has B. A. from Oxford,' he said. 'He should have come with me on this tour but I had some office work for him to do. By the way, Odili, I think you are wasting your talent here. I want you to come to the capital and take up a strategic post in the civil service. We shouldn't leave everything to the highland tribes. My secretary is from there; our people must press for their fair share of the national cake.' The hackneyed phrase 'national cake' was getting to some of us for the first time, and so it was greeted with applause. 'Owner of book!' cried one admirer, assigning in those three brief words the ownership of the white man's language to the Honourable Minister, who turned round and beamed on the speaker. That was when my friend Andrew Kadibe committed the unpardonable indiscretion of calling the Minister the nickname he had worn as a teacher: 'M.A. Minus Opportunity.' It was particularly bad because Andrew and the Minister were from the same village. The look he gave Andrew then reminded me of that other Nanga who had led the pack of hounds four years ago. 'Sorry, sir,' said Andrew pitiably. 'Sorry for what?' snarled the Minister. 'Don't mind the stupid boy, sir,' said Mr Nwege, greatly upset. 'This is what we were saying before.' 'I think we better begin,' said the Minister, still frowning. Although Mr Nwege had begun by saying that the distinguished guest needed no introduction he had gone on all the same to talk for well over twenty minutes---largely in praise of himself and all he had done for the Party in Anata 'and environs'. The crowd became steadily more restive especially when they noticed that the Minister was looking at his watch. Loud grumbles began to reach the dais from the audience. Then clear voices telling Nwege to sit down and let the man they came to hear talk. Nwege ignored all these warning signs---a more insensitive man you never saw. Finally one of the tough young men of the village stood up ten feet or so away and shouted: 'It is enough or I shall push you down and take three pence.' This did the trick. The laughter that went up must have been heard a mile away. Mr Nwege's concluding remarks were completely lost. In fact, it was not until the Minister rose to his feet that the laughter stopped. The story had it that many years ago when Mr Nwege was a poor, hungry elementary school teacher---that is before he built his own grammar school and became rich but apparently still hungry--he had an old rickety bicycle of the kind the villagers gave the onomatopoeic name of anikilija. Needless to say the brakes were very faulty. One day as he was cascading down a steep slope that led to a narrow bridge at the bottom of the hill he saw a lorry---an unusual phenomenon in those days---coming down the opposite slope. It looked like a head-on meeting on the bridge. In his extremity Mr Nwege had raised his voice and cried to passing pedestrians: 'In the name of God push me down!' Apparently nobody did, and so he added an inducement: 'Push me down and my three pence is yours!' From that day 'Push me down and take my three pence' became a popular Anata joke. The Minister's speech sounded spontaneous and was most effective. There was no election at hand, he said, amid laughter. He had not come to beg for their votes; it was just 'a family reunion---pure and simple'. He would have preferred not to speak to his own kinsmen in English which was after all a foreign language, but he had learnt from experience that speeches made in vernacular were liable to be distorted and misquoted in the press. Also there were some strangers in that audience who did not speak our own tongue and he did not wish to exclude them. They were all citizens of our great country whether they came from the highlands or the lowlands, etc. etc. The stranger he had in mind I think was Mrs Eleanor John, an influential party woman from the coast who had come in the Minister's party. She was heavily painted and perfumed and although no longer young seemed more than able to hold her own, if it came to that. She sat on the Minister's left, smoking and fanning herself. Next to her sat the beautiful young girl I have talked about. I didn't catch the two of them exchanging any words or even looks. I wondered what such a girl was doing in that tough crowd; it looked as though they had stopped by some convent on their way and offered to give her a lift to the next one. At the end of his speech the Minister and his party were invited to the Proprietor's Lodge---as Mr Nwege called his square, cement-block house. Outside, the dancers had all come alive again and the hunters---their last powder gone---were tamely waiting for the promised palm-wine. The Minister danced a few dignified steps to the music of each group and stuck red pound notes on the perspiring faces of the best dancers. To one group alone he gave away five pounds. The same man who had drawn our attention to the Minister's humility was now pointing out yet another quality. I looked at him closely for the first time and noticed that he had one bad eye---what we call a cowrie- shell eye. 'You see how e de do as if to say money be san-san,' he was saying. 'People wey de jealous the money gorment de pay Minister no sabi say no be him one de chop am. Na so so troway.' Later on in the Proprietor's Lodge I said to the Minister: 'You must have spent a fortune today.' He smiled at the glass of cold beer in his hand and said: 'You call this spend? You never see some thing, my brother. I no de keep anini for myself, na so so troway. If some person come to you and say "I wan' make you Minister" make you run like blazes comot. Na true word I tell you. To God who made me.' He showed the tip of his tongue to the sky to confirm the oath. 'Minister de sweet for eye but too much katakata de for inside. Believe me yours sincerely.' 'Big man, big palaver,' said the one-eyed man. It was left to Josiah, owner of a nearby shop-and-bar to sound a discordant, if jovial, note. 'Me one,' he said, 'I no kuku mind the katakata wey de for inside. Make you put Minister money for my hand and all the wahala on top. I no mind at all.' Everyone laughed. Then Mrs John said: 'No be so, my frien'. When you done experience rich man's trouble you no fit talk like that again. My people get one proverb: they say that when poor man done see with him own eye how to make big man e go beg make e carry him poverty de go je-je.' They said this woman was a very close friend of the Minister's, and her proprietary air would seem to confirm it and the fact that she had come all the way from Pokoma, three hundred and fifty miles away. I knew of her from the newspapers; she was a member of the Library Commission, one of the statutory boards within the Minister's portfolio. Her massive coral beads were worth hundreds of pounds according to the whisper circulating in the room while she talked. She was the 'merchant princess' par excellence. Poor beginning---an orphan, I believe---no school education, plenty of good looks and an iron determination, both of which she put to good account; beginning as a street hawker, rising to a small trader, and then to a big one. At present, they said, she presided over the entire trade in imported second-hand clothing worth hundreds of thousands. I edged quietly towards the journalist who seemed to know everyone in the party and whispered in his ear: 'Who is the young lady?' 'Ah,' he said, leaving his mouth wide open for a while as a danger signal. 'Make you no go near am-o. My hand no de for inside.' I told him I wasn't going near am-o; I merely asked who she was. 'The Minister no de introduce-am to anybody. So I think say na im girl-friend, or im cousin.' Then he confided: 'I done lookam, lookam, lookam sotay I tire. I no go tell you lie girls for this una part sabi fine-o. God Almighty!' I had also noticed that the Minister had skipped her when he had introduced his party to the teachers. I know it sounds silly, but I began to wonder what had happened to the Mrs Nanga of the scoutmastering days. They were newly married then. I remembered her particularly because she was one of the very first women I knew to wear a white, ladies' helmet which in our ignorance we called helment and which was in those days the very acme of sophistication. CHAPTER TWO A common saying in the country after Independence was that it didn't matter what you knew but who you knew. And, believe me, it was no idle talk. For a person like me who simply couldn't stoop to lick any Big Man's boots it created a big problem. In fact one reason why I took this teaching job in a bush, private school instead of a smart civil service job in the city with car, free housing, etc., was to give myself a certain amount of autonomy. So when I told the Minister that I had applied for a scholarship to do a post-graduate Certificate of Education in London it did not even cross my mind to enlist his help. I think it is important to stress this point. I had had scholarships both to the secondary school and to the University without any godfather's help but purely on my own merit. And in any case it wasn't too important whether I did the post- graduate course or not. As far as I was concerned the important thing was going to be the opportunity of visiting Europe which in itself must be a big education. My friend Andrew Kadibe, who did the same course the previous year, seemed to have got a big kick out of it. I don't mean the white girls---you can have those out here nowadays---but quite small things. I remember him saying for instance that the greatest delight of his entire visit to Britain was when, for the first time in his twenty-seven years, a white man---a taxi-driver I think---carried his suitcase and said 'Sir' to him. He was so thrilled he tipped the man ten shillings. We laughed a lot about it but I could so easily see it happen. But much as I wanted to go to Europe I wasn't going to sell my soul for it or beg anyone to help me. It was the Minister himself who came back to the post-graduate question at the end of his reception without any prompting whatever from me. (As a matter of fact I tried hard to avoid catching his attention again.) And the proposals he made didn't seem to me to be offensive in any way. He invited me to come and spend my holidays with him in the capital and while I was there he would try and find out from his Cabinet colleague, the Minister of Overseas Training, whether there was anything doing. 'If you come as soon as you close,' he said, 'you can stay in my guest-room with everything complete---bedroom, parlour, bathroom, latrine, everything---self-contained. You can live by yourself and do anything you like there, it's all yours.' 'Make you no min' am, sha-a,' said Mrs John to me. 'I kin see say you na good boy. Make you no gree am spoil you. Me I no de for dis bed-room and bath-room business- o. As you see dis man so, na wicked soul. If he tell you stand make you run.' Everybody laughed. 'Eleanor, why you wan disgrace me and spoil my name so for public for nothing sake. Wetin I do you? Everybody here sabi say me na good Christian. No be so, James?' 'Ah, na so, sir,' replied the journalist happily. In spite of all this joking the Minister's invitation was serious and firm. He said it was important I came at once as he was planning to go to the United States in about two months. 'They are going to give me doctorate degree,' he announced proudly. 'Doctor of Laws, LL. D.' 'That's great,' I said. 'Congratulations.' 'Thank you, my brother.' 'So the Minister will become "Chief the Honourable Doctor M.A. Nanga",' intoned the journalist, a whole second ahead of my own thoughts on the matter. We all cheered the impressive address and its future owner. 'You no see say the title fit my name pem,' said the Minister with boyish excitement, and we all said yes it suited him perfectly. 'But the man wey I like him name pass na "Chief the Honourable Alhaji Doctor Mongo Sego, M.P.",' said the Minister somewhat wistfully. 'Him own good too,' admitted the incomparable journalist, but e no pass your own, sir: "Chief the Honourable Dr M.A. Nanga, M.P., LL. D." Na waa! Nothing fit passam.' 'What about "Chief Dr Mrs"?' I threw in mischievously. 'That one no sweet for mouth,' said the Minister. 'E no catch.' 'Wetin wrong with am?' asked Mrs John. 'Because na woman get am e no go sweet for mouth. I done talk say na only for election time woman de get equality for dis our country.' 'No be so, madam,' said the journalist. 'You no see how the title rough like sand-paper for mouth: "Dr Chief Mrs". E no catch at all.' Before the Minister left he made sure I took down his residential address in the capital. I felt Mr Nwege's malevolent eyes boring into me as I wrote it down. And hardly were the farewells out of his mouth before he turned to me and asked sneeringly if I was still of the opinion that it was unnecessary to be introduced to the Minister. 'What I objected to was standing in a line like school children,' I said, somewhat embarrassed. 'In any case I didn't need to be introduced. We knew each other already.' 'You can thank your stars that I am not a wicked man,' he continued as though I had said nothing, 'otherwise I would have told him....' 'Why don't you run after him now?' I asked. 'He cannot have gone very far.' With that I walked away from the obsequious old fool. But when I came to think of the events of the day I had to admit that Mr Nwege had not had fair returns for all his trouble. I don't think the Minister gave him as much as a second to raise any of his own problems. And it was uncharitable I thought for him to have joined in as loudly as he had done in the 'push me down' laughter. For the sake of appearances at least he should have kept a straight face. It was clear the great man did not easily forgive those who took up part of his time to make their own speeches. He ostentatiously ignored Mr Nwege for the rest of the day. Poor man! He had probably lost the chance of getting on that new corporation for the disposal of dilapidated government wares with which he was no doubt hoping to replace the even more worn-out equipment in his school. So although it was unreasonable for him to have turned his anger on me there was no doubt he had cause to be angry. Actually his teachers had let him down badly that afternoon. Apart from myself there was that 'M.A. minus opportunity' incident which for some obscure reason seemed to have annoyed the Minister even more than Mr Nwege's long speech. At least he contained the latter annoyance with laughter. And to crown Mr Nwege's discomfitures his Senior Tutor, a man in his sixties, had sallied out of the Lodge with one bottle of beer under each armpit---to the amusement of everyone except Mr Nwege who had clearly not gone out of his way to buy beer at its present impossible price for members of his staff to take home. The Senior Tutor, by the way, was a jolly old rogue who could get away with anything---if need be by playing the buffoon. He was a great frequenter of Josiah's bar across the road. He had a fine sense of humour---like when he asked why so many young people travelled to Britain to be called to the Bar when he could call them all to Josiah's bar. I was lighting my Tilley lamp later that evening when someone knocked on my door. 'Come in if you are good-looking,' I said. 'Is Odili in?' asked an unnatural, high-pitched voice. 'Come in, fool,' I said. It was a silly joke Andrew and I never tired of playing on each other. The idea was to sound like a girl and so send the other's blood pressure up. 'How the go de go?' I asked. 'Bo, son of man done tire.' 'Did you find out about that girl?' I asked. 'Why na so so girl, girl, girl, girl been full your mouth. Wetin? So person no fit talk any serious talk with you. I never see.' 'O.K., Mr Gentleman,' I said, pumping the lamp. 'Any person wey first mention about girl again for this room make him tongue cut. How is the weather?' He laughed. At that point my house-boy, a fifteen-year-old rogue called Peter, came in to ask what he should cook for supper. 'You no hear the news for three o'clock?' I asked, feigning great seriousness. 'Sir?' 'Government done pass new law say na only two times a day person go de chop now. For morning and for afternoon. Finish.' He laughed. 'That is next to impossibility,' he said. Peter liked his words long. He had his standard six certificate which two or three years before could have got him a job as a messenger in an office or even a teacher in an elementary school. But today there simply aren't any jobs for his kind of person any more and he was lucky to be a sort of housekeeper to me for one pound a month, including, of course, free board and lodging. He spent most of his spare time reading, although his favourite literature is of a very dubious kind. I once found him reading a strange book he had just received from India. I think it was called How to Solve the Fair Sex and had cost him no less than ten shillings excluding postage from New Delhi. I had roundly rebuked him. I couldn't think what to eat. So I told him to go and roast me some yams. 'Roast yams at night?' screamed Andrew. 'If you knock at my door in the middle of the night I shan't wake up.' This was a crude reference to the night I had a violent stomach-ache after eating half a dozen roasted corn. I had been so scared I had gone and called Andrew up to take me to hospital in his ancient car. 'What do you suggest I eat then?' I asked him. 'Am I your wife? Don't you see all the girls waiting for husbands?' 'Don't you fear. I have my eyes on one right now.' 'True? Give me tori. Who is she? What about the poem?' 'The same,' I said, and we recited together a poem one of our acquaintances had composed for his wedding invitation card: 'It's time to spread the news abroad That we are well prepared To tie ourselves with silvery chord Of sweet conjugal bond.' 'Look at this small pickin,' said Andrew in pretended anger to Peter who had joined our laughter. 'How dare you laugh with your elders?' 'Sorry, sir,' said Peter, frowning comically. 'What do you think I should eat, Peter?' I asked. 'Anything master talk. Like Jollof rice, sir.' I knew. Whenever you allowed him a say in this matter he invariably came up with Jollof rice--his favourite dish. 'O.K.,' I said. 'One cup of rice---not one and a half; not one and a quarter.' 'Yes, sir,' he said, and went away happily. I knew he would cook at least two cups. 'Who is she?' I said. 'Who?' 'The girl with the Minister.' 'His girl-friend.' 'I see.' 'Actually it's more than that. He is planning to marry her according to native law and custom. Apparently his missus is too "bush" for his present position so he wants a bright new "parlour-wife" to play hostess at his parties.' 'Too bad. Who told you all this?' 'Somebody.' 'Too bad. Without knowing anything whatever about that girl I feel she deserves to be somebody's first wife---not an old man's mistress. Anyway it's none of my business.' 'He sent her to a Women's Training College,' said Andrew. 'So he has been planning it for a few years at least. I feel sorry for her; that man has no conscience.' I said nothing. 'Imagine such a beautiful thing wasting herself on such an empty-headed ass. I so enjoyed wounding his pride! Did you see how wild he looked?' 'Yes,' I said, 'you hit him hard.' Actually I was amused how Andrew was desperately trying to convince himself---and me---that he had gone to the reception with the avowed intention to deflate his empty-headed kontriman. He seemed to be forgetting in a hurry that he had earlier refused to support me at the staff meeting when I had objected to Mr Nwege's stupid plans. 'Just think of such a cultureless man going abroad and calling himself Minister of Culture. Ridiculous. This is why the outside world laughs at us.' 'That is true,' I said, 'but the outside world isn't all that important, is it? In any case people like Chief Nanga don't care two hoots about the outside world. He is concerned with the inside world, with how to retain his hold on his constituency and there he is adept, you must admit. Anyway, as he told us today, Churchill never passed his School Certificate.' 'I see the offer of free lodging is already having its effect.' I began to laugh and Andrew joined in. You could tell at a glance that he knew me in a way that Mr Nwege didn't. It was one thing to tease me for accepting the Minister's offer of accommodation, but I just didn't want anybody to think that Odili Samalu was capable of stooping to obtain a scholarship in any underhand way. In the words of my boy, Peter, it was 'next to impossibility'. Andrew knew of course that I had long been planning to go to the capital and he knew about Elsie. Well, Elsie! Where does one begin to write about her? The difficulty in writing this kind of story is that the writer is armed with all kinds of hindsight which he didn't have when the original events were happening. When he introduces a character like Elsie for instance, he already has at the back of his mind a total picture of her; her entrance, her act and her exit. And this tends to colour even the first words he writes. I can only hope that being aware of this danger I have successfully kept it at bay. As far as is humanly possible I shall try not to jump ahead of my story. Elsie was, and for that matter still is, the only girl I met and slept with the same day---in fact within an hour. I know that faster records do exist and am not entering this one for that purpose, nor am I trying to prejudice anyone against Elsie. I only put it down because that was the way it happened. It was during my last term at the University and, having as usual put off my revision to the last moment, I was having a rough time. But one evening there was a party organized by the Students' Christian Movement and I decided in spite of my arrears of work to attend and give my brain time to cool off. I am not usually lucky, but that evening I was. I saw Elsie standing in a group with other student nurses and made straight for her. She turned out to be a most vivacious girl newly come to the nursing School. We danced twice, then I suggested we took a walk away from the noisy highlife band and she readily agreed. If I had been left to my own devices nothing might have happened that day. But, no doubt without meaning to, Elsie took a hand in the matter. She said she was thirsty and I took her to my rooms for a drink of water. She was one of those girls who send out loud cries in the heat of the thing. It happened again each time. But that first day it was rather funny because she kept calling: 'Ralph darling.' I remember wondering why Ralph. It was not until weeks later that I got to know that she was engaged to some daft fellow called Ralph, a medical student in Edinburgh. The funny part of it was that my next-door neighbour---an English Honours student and easily the most ruthless and unprincipled womanizer in the entire university campus---changed to calling me Ralph from that day. He was known to most students by his nickname, Irre, which was short for Irresponsible. His most celebrated conquest was a female undergraduate who had seemed so inaccessible that boys called her Unbreakable. Irre became interested in her and promised his friends to break her one day soon. Then one afternoon we saw her enter his rooms. Our hall began to buzz with excitement as word went round, and we stood in little groups all along the corridor, waiting. Half an hour or so later Irre came out glistening with sweat, closed the door quietly behind him and then held up a condom bloated with his disgusting seed. That was Irre for you---a real monster. I suppose I was somehow flattered by the notice a man of such prowess had taken of Elsie's cry. When I confided to him later that Ralph was the name of the girl's proper boy-friend he promptly changed to calling me Assistant Ralph or, if Elsie was around, simply A. R. Despite this rather precipitous beginning Elsie and I became very good and steady friends. I can't pretend that I ever thought of marriage, but I must admit I did begin to feel a little jealous any time I found her reading and rereading a blue British air-letter with the red Queen and Houses of Parliament stamped on its back. Elsie was such a beautiful, happy girl and she made no demands whatever. When I left the University she was heart-broken and so was I for that matter. We exchanged letters every week or two weeks at the most. I remember during the postal strike of 1963 when I didn't hear from her for over a month I nearly kicked the bucket, as my boy, Peter, would have said. Now she was working in a hospital about twelve miles outside Bori and so we arranged that I should spend my next holidays in the capital and take the bus to her hospital every so often while she would be able to spend her days off in the city. That was why the Minister's offer couldn't have come at a more opportune moment. I had of course one or two bachelor friends in the capital who would have had no difficulty in putting me up. But they weren't likely to provide a guest-room with all amenities. For days after the Minister's visit I was still trying to puzzle out why he had seemed so offended by his old nickname---'M.A. Minus Opportunity'. I don't know why I should have been so preoccupied with such unimportant trash. But it often happens to me like that: I get hold of some pretty inane thought or a cheap tune I would ordinarily be ashamed to be caught whistling, like that radio jingle advertising an intestinal worm expeller, and I get stuck with it. When I first knew Mr Nanga in 1948 he had seemed quite happy with his nickname. I suspect he had in fact invented it himself. Certainly he enjoyed it. His name being M.A. Nanga, his fellow teachers called him simply and fondly 'M.A.'; he answered 'Minus Opportunity', which he didn't have to do unless he liked it. Why then the present angry reaction? I finally decided that it stemmed from the same general anti-intellectual feeling in the country. In 1948 Mr Nanga could admit, albeit light- heartedly, to a certain secret yearning for higher education; in 1964 he was valiantly proving that a man like him was better without it. Of course he had not altogether persuaded himself, or else he would not have shown such excitement over the LL.D. arranged for him from some small, back-street college. CHAPTER THREE Before making the long journey to the capital, I thought I should first pay a short visit to my home village, Urua, about fifteen miles from Anata. I wanted to see my father about one or two matters but more especially I wanted to take my boy, Peter, to his parents for the holidays as I had promised to do before they let me have him. Peter was naturally very excited about going home after nearly twelve months, during which he had become a wage-earner. At first I found it amusing when he went over to Josiah's shop across the road and bought a rayon head-tie for his mother and a head of tobacco for his father. But as I thought more about it I realized how those touching gestures by a mere boy, whom I paid twenty shillings a month, showed up my own quite different circumstances. And I felt envious. I had no mother to buy head-ties for, and although I had a father, giving things to him was like pouring a little water into a driedup well. My mother had been his second wife, but she had died in her first childbirth. This meant in the minds of my people that I was an unlucky child, if not a downright wicked and evil one. Not that my father ever said so openly. To begin with he had too many other wives and children to take any special notice of me. But I was always a very sensitive child and knew from quite early in my life that there was something wrong with my affairs. My father's first wife, whom we all call Mama, brought me up like one of her own children; still I sensed there was something missing. One day at play another child with whom I had fallen out called me 'Bad child that crunched his mother's skull'. That was it. I am not saying that I had an unhappy or a lonely childhood. There were too many of us in the family for anyone to think of loneliness or unhappiness. And I must say this for my father that he never tolerated any of his wives drawing a line no matter how thin between her own children and those of others. We had only one Mama. The other two wives (at the time---there are more now) were called Mother by their children, or so and so's mother by the rest. Of course as soon as I grew old enough to understand a few simple proverbs I realized that I should have died and let my mother live. Whenever my people go to console a woman whose baby has died at birth or soon after, they always tell her to dry her eyes because it is better the water is spilled than the pot broken. The idea being that a sound pot can always return to the stream. My father was a District Interpreter. In those days when no one understood as much as 'come' in the white man's language, the District Officer was like the Supreme Deity, and the Interpreter the principal minor god who carried prayers and sacrifice to Him. Every sensible supplicant knew that the lesser god must first be wooed and put in a sweet frame of mind before he could undertake to intercede with the Owner of the Sky. So Interpreters in those days were powerful, very rich, widely known and hated. Wherever the D. O.'s power was felt---and that meant everywhere---the Interpreter's name was held in fear and trembling. We grew up knowing that the world was full of enemies. Our father had protective medicine located at crucial points in our house and compound. One, I remember, hung over the main entrance; but the biggest was in a gourd in a corner of his bedroom. No child went alone into that room which was virtually always under lock and key anyway. We were told that such and such homes were never to be entered; and those people were pointed out to us from whom we must not accept food. But we also had many friends. There were all those people who brought my father gifts of yams, pots of palm- wine or bottles of European drink, goats, sheep, chicken. Or those who brought their children to live with us as house-boys or their brides-to-be for training in modern housekeeping. In spite of the enormous size of our family there was always meat in the house. At one time, I remember, my father used to slaughter a goat every Saturday, which was more than most families did in two years, and this sign of wealth naturally exposed us to their jealousy and malevolence. But it was not until many years later that I caught one fleeting, terrifying glimpse of just how hated an Interpreter could be. I was in secondary school then and it was our half-term holiday. As my home village was too far away and I didn't want to spend the holiday in school I decided to go with one of my friends to his home which was four or five miles away. His parents were very happy to see us and his mother at once went to boil some yams for us. After we had eaten, the father who had gone out to buy himself some snuff came hurrying back. To my surprise he asked his son what he said my name was again. 'Odili Samalu.' 'Of what town?' There was anxiety, an uneasy tension in his voice. I was afraid. 'Urua, sir,' I said. 'I see,' he said coldly. 'Who is your father?' 'Hezekiah Samalu,' I said and then added quickly, 'a retired District Interpreter.' It was better, I thought, to come out with it all at once and end the prolonged interrogation. 'Then you cannot stay in my house,' he said with that evenness of tone which our people expect a man of substance to use in moments of great crisis when lesser men and women would make loud, empty noises. 'Why, Papa, what has he done?' asked my friend in alarm. 'I have said it.... I don't blame you, my son, or you either, because no one has told you. But know it from today that no son of Hezekiah Samalu's shelters under my roof.' He looked outside. 'There is still light and time for you to get back to the school.' I don't think I shall ever know just in what way my father had wronged that man. A few weeks later, during the next holidays I tried to find out, but all my father did was to rave at me for wandering like a homeless tramp when I should be working at the books he sent me to school to learn. I was only fifteen then and many more years were to pass before I knew how to stand my ground before him. What I should have told him then was that he had not sent me anywhere. I was in that school only because I was able to win a scholarship. It was the same when I went to the University. The trouble with my father was his endless desire for wives and children. Or perhaps I should say children and wives. Right now he has five wives---the youngest a mere girl whom he married last year. And he is at least sixty- eight, possibly seventy. He gets a small pension which would be adequate for him if he had a small family instead of his present thirty-five children. Of course he doesn't even make any pretence of providing for his family nowadays. He leaves every wife to her own devices. It is not too bad for the older ones like Mama whose grown-up children help to support them; but the younger ones have to find their children's school fees from farming and petty trading. All the old man does is buy himself a jar of palm-wine every morning and a bottle of schnapps now and again. Recently he had plunged into the politics of our village and was the local chairman of the P. O. P. My father and I had our most serious quarrel about eighteen months ago when I told him to his face that he was crazy to be planning to marry his fifth wife. In my anger I said he was storing up trouble for others. This was, of course, a most reprehensible remark to make. The meaning was that I didn't expect him to have much longer to live, which was indelicate and wicked. Had Mama not intervened he probably would have pronounced a curse on me. As it was, he satisfied himself by merely vowing never to touch a penny of mine since he must not store up trouble for me. Mama persuaded me to sue for peace by going down on my knees to ask forgiveness and making a peace offering of a bottle of schnapps, two bottles of White Horse and a bottle of Martell. We were now technically at peace and I was going to tell him about my plans for the postgraduate course. But I knew in advance what he would say. He would tell me that I already had more than enough education, that all the important people in the country today---ministers, businessmen, Members of Parliament, etc., did not have half my education. He would then tell me for the hundredth time to leave 'this foolish teaching', and look for a decent job in the government and buy myself a car. As it turned out I arrived in the capital, Bori, exactly one month after Chief Nanga's unexpected invitation. Although I had written a letter to say when I would be arriving and had followed it up with a telegram, I still had a lingering fear as I announced the address rather importantly and settled back in the taxi that morning. I was thinking that a man of Chief Nanga's easy charm and country-wide popularity must throw out that kind of invitation several times each day without giving it much thought. Wasn't I being unreasonable in trying to hold him down to it? Anyhow I had taken the precaution of writing to an old friend, a newly qualified lawyer struggling to set up in private practice. I would watch Nanga's reaction very closely and if necessary move out smartly again on the following day as though that had always been my intention. When we got to the Minister's residence my fear increased as his one-eyed stalwart stopped the car at the gate and began to look me over. 'Who you want?' he scowled. 'Chief Nanga.' 'He give you appointment?' 'No, but...' 'Make you park for outside. I go go haskam if he want see you. Wetin be your name?' Fortunately the Minister, who was apparently relaxing with his family in the lounge came to the door, and on seeing us rushed outside and threw his arm round me. Then his wife and three of his children trooped out and joined in the excited welcoming. 'Come right inside,' said the Minister. 'We have been waiting for you all morning. The house is yours.' I hung back to pay the taxi-driver. 'No, no, no!' cried my host. 'Go right inside. I will settle with the driver. He na my very good friend, no be so, driver?' 'Yes, sir, master,' said the driver, who had hitherto seemed a most unfriendly man to me. Now he broke into a broad smile showing smoke-and kola-stained teeth. For a mother of seven, the eldest of whom was sixteen or seventeen, Mrs Nanga was and still is very well kept. Her face, unlike her husband's had become blurred in my memory. But on seeing her now it all came back again. She was bigger now of course---almost matronly. Her face was one of the friendliest I had ever seen. She showed me to the Guest's Suite and practically ordered me to have a bath while she got some food ready. 'It won't take long,' she said, 'the soup is already made.' A small thing, but it struck me even as early as this: Mr Nanga always spoke English or pidgin; his children, whom I discovered went to expensive private schools run by European ladies spoke impeccable English, but Mrs Nanga stuck to our language---with the odd English word thrown in now and again. My host did not waste time. At about five o'clock that afternoon he told me to get ready and go with him to see the Hon. Simon Koko, Minister for Overseas Training. Earlier that day one of those unseasonal December rains which invariably brought on the cold harmattan had fallen. It had been quite heavy and windy and the streets were now littered with dry leaves, and sometimes half-blocked by broken-off tree branches; and one had to mind fallen telegraph and high-voltage electric wires. Chief Koko, a fat jovial man wearing an enormous home- knitted red-and-yellow sweater was about to have coffee. He asked if we would join him or have some alcohol. 'I no follow you black white-men for drink tea and coffee in the hot afternoon,' said Chief Nanga. 'Whisky and soda for me and for Mr Samalu.' Chief Koko explained that nothing warmed the belly like hot coffee and proceeded to take a loud and long sip followed by a satisfied Ahh! Then he practically dropped the cup and saucer on the drinks-table by his chair and jumped up as though a scorpion had stung him. 'They have killed me,' he wailed, wringing his hands, breathing hard and loud and rolling his eyes. Chief Nanga and I sprang up in alarm and asked together what had happened. But our host kept crying that they had killed him and they could now go and celebrate. 'What is it, S. I.?' asked Chief Nanga, putting an arm around the other's neck. 'They have poisoned my coffee,' he said, and broke down completely. Meanwhile the steward, hearing his master's cry, had rushed in. 'Who poisoned my coffee?' he asked. 'Not me-o!' 'Call the cook!' thundered the Minister. 'Call him here. I will kill him before I die. Go and bring him.' The steward dashed out again and soon returned to say the cook had gone out. The Minister slumped into his chair and began to groan and hold his stomach. Then his bodyguard whom we had seen dressed like a cowboy hurried in from the front gate, and hearing what had happened dashed out at full speed to try and catch the cook. 'Let's go and call a doctor,' I said. 'That's right,' said Chief Nanga with relief and, leaving his friend, rushed towards the telephone. I hadn't thought about the telephone. 'What is the use of a doctor?' moaned our poisoned host. 'Do they know about African poison? They have killed me. What have I done to them? Did I owe them anything? Oh! Oh! Oh! What have I done?' Meanwhile Chief Nanga had been trying to phone a doctor and was not apparently getting anywhere. He was now shouting threats of immediate sacking at some invisible enemy. 'This is Chief the Honourable Nanga speaking,' he was saying. 'I will see that you are dealt with. Idiot. That is the trouble with this country. Don't worry, you will see. Bloody fool....' At this point the cowboy bodyguard came in dragging the cook by his shirt collar. The Minister sprang at him with an agility which completely belied his size and condition. 'Wait, Master,' pleaded the cook. 'Wait your head!' screamed his employer, going for him. 'Why you put poison for my coffee?' His huge body was quivering like jelly. 'Me? Put poison for master? Nevertheless!' said the cook, side-stepping to avoid a heavy blow from the Minister. Then with surprising presence of mind he saved himself. (Obviously the cowboy had already told him of his crime.) He made for the cup of coffee quickly, grabbed it and drank every drop. There was immediate silence. We exchanged surprised glances. 'Why I go kill my master?' he asked of a now considerably sobered audience. 'Abi my head no correct? And even if to say I de craze why I no go go jump for inside lagoon instead to kill my master?' His words carried conviction. He proceeded to explain the mystery of the coffee. The Minister's usual Nescaf had run out at breakfast and he had not had time to get a new tin. So he had brewed some of his own locally processed coffee which he maintained he had bought from OHMS. There was an ironic twist to this incident which neither of the ministers seemed to notice. OHMS---Our Home Made Stuff---was the popular name of the gigantic campaign which the Government had mounted all over the country to promote the consumption of locally made products. Newspapers, radio and television urged every patriot to support this great national effort which, they said, held the key to economic emancipation without which our hardwon political freedom was a mirage. Cars equipped with loudspeakers poured out new jingles up and down the land as they sold their products in town and country. In the language of the ordinary people these cars, and not the wares they advertised, became known as OHMS. It was apparently from one of them the cook had bought the coffee that had nearly cost him his life. The matter having been resolved to everyone's satisfaction I began to feel vicariously embarrassed on behalf of Chief Koko. If anyone had asked my opinion I would have voted strongly in favour of our leaving right away. But no one did. Instead Chief Nanga had begun to tease the other. 'But S. I.,' he said, 'you too fear death. Small thing you begin holler "they done kill me, they done kill me!" Like person wey scorpion done lego am for him prick.' I saw his face turning towards me no doubt to get me to join in his laughter. I quickly looked away and began to gaze out of the window. 'Why I no go fear?' asked Chief Koko laughing foolishly. 'If na you you no go piss for inside your trouser?' 'Nonsense! Why I go fear? I kill person?' They carried on in this vein for quite a while. I sipped my whisky quietly, avoiding the eyes of both. But I was saying within myself that in spite of his present bravado Chief Nanga had been terribly scared himself, witness his ill-tempered, loud-mouthed panic at the telephone. And I don't think his fear had been for Chief Koko's safety either. I suspect he felt personally threatened. Our people have a saying that when one slave sees another cast into a shallow grave he should know that when the time comes he will go the same way. Naturally my scholarship did not get a chance to be mentioned on this occasion. We drove home in silence. Only once did Chief Nanga turn to me and say: 'If anybody comes to you and wants to make you minister, run away. True.' That evening I ate my supper with Mrs Nanga and the children, the Minister having gone out to an embassy reception after which he would go to a party meeting somewhere. 'Any woman who marries a minister,' said his wife later as we sat watching TV, 'has married worse than a night- watchman.' We both laughed. There was no hint of complaint in her voice. She was clearly a homely, loyal wife prepared for the penalty of her husband's greatness. You couldn't subvert her. 'It must be very enjoyable going to all these embassy parties and meeting all the big guns,' I said in pretended innocence. 'What can you enjoy there?' she asked with great spirit. 'Nine pence talk and three pence food. "Hallo, hawa you. Nice to see you again." All na lie lie.' I laughed heartily and then got up pretending to admire the many family photographs on the walls. I asked Mrs Nanga about this one and that as I gravitated slowly to the one on the radiogram which I had noticed as soon as I had stepped into the house earlier in the day. It was the same beautiful girl as in Chief Nanga's entourage in Anata. 'Is this your sister?' I asked. 'Edna. No, she is our wife.' 'Your wife? How?' She laughed. 'We are getting a second wife to help me.' The first thing critics tell you about our ministers' official residences is that each has seven bedrooms and seven bathrooms, one for every day of the week. All I can say is that on that first night there was no room in my mind for criticism. I was simply hypnotized by the luxury of the great suite assigned to me. When I lay down in the double bed that seemed to ride on a cushion of air, and switched on that reading lamp and saw all the beautiful furniture anew from the lying down position and looked beyond the door to the gleaming bathroom and the towels as large as a lappa I had to confess that if I were at that moment made a minister I would be most anxious to remain one for ever. And maybe I should have thanked God that I wasn't. We ignore man's basic nature if we say, as some critics do, that because a man like Nanga had risen overnight from poverty and insignificance to his present opulence he could be persuaded without much trouble to give it up again and return to his original state. A man who has just come in from the rain and dried his body and put on dry clothes is more reluctant to go out again than another who has been indoors all the time. The trouble with our new nation---as I saw it then lying on that bed---was that none of us had been indoors long enough to be able to say 'To hell with it'. We had all been in the rain together until yesterday Then a handful of us---the smart and the lucky and hardly ever the best---had scrambled for the one shelter our former rulers left, and had taken it over and barricaded themselves in. And from within they sought to persuade the rest through numerous loudspeakers, that the first phase of the struggle had been won and that the next phase---the extension of our house---was even more important and called for new and original tactics; it required that all argument should cease and the whole people speak with one voice and that any more dissent and argument outside the door of the shelter would subvert and bring down the whole house. Needless to say I did not spend the entire night on these elevated thoughts. Most of the time my mind was on Elsie, so much so in fact that I had had to wake up in the middle of the night and change my pyjama trousers. CHAPTER FOUR I usually don't mind how late I stay up at night but I do mind getting up too early. I was still fast asleep that first morning in the capital when I heard the Minister's voice. I opened my eyes and tried to smile and say good morning. 'Lazy boy,' he said indulgently. 'Don't worry. I know you must be dog-tired after yesterday's journey. See you later. I am off to the office now.' He looked as bright as a new shilling in his immaculate white robes. And he had only come home at two last night, or rather this morning! The crunching of his tyres on the loose gravel drive had woken me up in the night and I had looked at my diamond-faced watch which I often forgot to take off even for my bath. I had just bought it and believed the claim that it was everything-proof. Now I know better. But to return to Chief Nanga. There was something incongruous in his going to the office. It sounds silly to say this of a Cabinet Minister but I could not easily associate him in my mind with a desk and files. He was obviously more suited to an out-of- door life meeting and charming people. But anyhow there he was going off to his Ministry punctually at eight. Much as I already liked and admired Mrs Nanga, I must confess I was inwardly pleased when she told me as I had my breakfast that she and the children were leaving for Anata in three days. Apparently the Minister insisted that his children must be taken home to their village at least once a year. 'Very wise,' I said. 'Without it,' said Mrs Nanga, 'they would become English people. Don't you see they hardly speak our language? Ask them something in it and they reply in English. The little one, Micah, called my mother "a dirty, bush woman".' 'Terrible,' I said, laughing even though the thing wasn't funny. 'Of course I slapped okro seeds out of his mouth,' said Mrs Nanga proudly. 'My mother not knowing what he had said began to rebuke me.' 'Yes, it is good that you take them home sometimes. When do you come back?' 'After Christmas. You know Eddy's father is going to America in January.' Eddy is the name of her first son. The reason why I felt happy at the news of Mrs Nanga's journey was a natural one. No married woman, however accommodating, would view kindly the sort of plans I had in mind, namely to bring Elsie to the house and spend some time with her. Not even a self-contained guest suite such as I was now occupying would make it look well. Even if Mrs Nanga did not object, Elsie most certainly would. My experience of these things is that no woman, however liberal, wants other women to hold a low opinion of her morals. I am not talking about prostitutes because I don't go in for them. My host was one of those people around whom things were always happening. I must always remain grateful to him for the insight I got into the affairs of our country during my brief stay in his house. From the day a few years before when I had left Parliament depressed and aggrieved, I had felt, like so many other educated citizens of our country, that things were going seriously wrong without being able to say just how. We complained about our country's lack of dynamism and abdication of the leadership to which it was entitled in the continent, or so we thought. We listened to whispers of scandalous deals in high places---sometimes involving sums of money that I for one didn't believe existed in the country. But there was really no hard kernel of fact to get one's teeth into. But sitting at Chief Nanga's feet I received enlightenment; many things began to crystallize out of the mist---some of the emergent forms were not nearly as ugly as I had suspected but many seemed much worse. However, I was not making these judgements at the time, or not strongly anyhow. I was simply too fascinated by the almost ritual lifting of the clouds, as I had been one day, watching for the first time the unveiling of the white dome of Kilimanjaro at sunset. I stood breathless; I did not immediately say: 'Ah! this is the tallest mountain in Africa', or 'It isn't really as impressive as I had expected'. All that had to wait. I had neglected to bring any reading matter with me on my visit to Bori, and the Minister's library turned out to be not quite to my taste. There was a decorative set of an American encyclopaedia, there was She by Rider Haggard, and also Ayesha, or the Return of She; then there were a few books by Marie Corelli and Bertha Clay---I remember in particular The Sorrows of Satan. That was all really except for a few odds and ends like Speeches: How to Make Them. I flipped through a few volumes of the encyclopaedia and settled down to read the daily newspapers more closely than I had ever done. And believe me I discovered I had been missing a lot of fun. There was, for instance, this notice inserted into the Daily Chronicle by the City Clerk of Bori: The attention of the Public is hereby drawn to Section 12 of the Bori (Conservancy) Bye-laws, 1951: (i) Occupiers of all premises shall provide pails for excrement; the size of such pails and the materials of which they are constructed shall be approved by the City Engineer. (ii) The number of such pails to be provided in any premises shall be specified by the City Engineer. The Public are warned against unauthorized increases in the number of pails already existing on their premises. The surprises and contrasts in our great country were simply inexhaustible. Here was I in our capital city, reading about pails of excrement from the cosy comfort of a princely seven bathroom mansion with its seven gleaming, silent action, water-closets! Most of my life (except for a brief interlude at the University where I first saw water-closets) I'd used pit- latrines like the one at what was then my house in Anata. As everyone knows, pit-latrines are not particularly luxurious or ultra-modern but with reasonable care they are adequate and clean. Bucket latrines are a different matter altogether. I saw one for the first time when I lived as a house-boy with an elder half-sister and her husband in the small trading town of Giligili. I was twelve then and it was the most squalid single year of my life. So disgusting did I find the bucket that I sometimes went for days on end without any bowel evacuation. And then there was that week when all the night-soil men in the town decided to go on strike. I practically went without food. As the local inhabitants said at the time, you could 'hear' the smell of the town ten miles away. The only excitement I remember in Giligili was our nightly war on rats. We had two rooms in the large iron- roofed house with its earth walls and floor. My sister, her husband and two small children slept in one and the rest of us---three boys---shared the other with bags of rice, garri, beans and other foodstuff. And, of course, the rats. They came and sank their holes where the floor and the walls met. As soon as night fell they emerged to eat the grains while we sat around the open fire in the kitchen. You could never get at them because as soon as you entered the room with a lamp they flew into their two holes. We tried getting them with the little iron traps the blacksmiths made, on which you attached a bait---usually a small piece of dried fish. But after one or two of them got killed the rest learnt to avoid that fishy bait. It was then we decided to go hunting. I, or one of the others, would tiptoe in the dark and quietly plug the holes with pieces of rag while the rest waited outside with sticks. After a reasonable interval those outside would charge in with a lamp, slam the door and the massacre would begin. It worked very well. As a rule we did not kill the very small ones; we saved them up for the future.... Now all that seemed half a century away. When Chief Nanga came back to lunch just before two it was clear his mind was preoccupied with something or other. His greeting, though full of warmth as ever, was too brief. He went straight to the telephone and called some ministerial colleague. I soon gathered that it was the Minister of Public Construction. The conversation made little sense to me at the time especially as I heard only one end of it. But my host spoke with great feeling, almost annoyance, about a certain road which had to be tarred before the next elections. Then I heard the figure of two hundred and ten thousand pounds. But what really struck me was when my Minister said to his colleague: 'Look T. C. we agreed that this road should be tarred. What is this dillying and dallying...? Which expert? So you want to listen to expert now? You know very well T. C. that you cannot trust these our boys. That is why I always say that I prefer to deal with Europeans... What? Don't worry about the Press; I will make sure that they don't publish it....' When he finally put down the phone he said, 'Foolish man!' to it and then turned to me. 'That was Hon. T. C. Kobino. Very stupid man. The Cabinet has approved the completion of the road between Giligili and Anata since January but this foolish man has been dillying and dallying, because it is not in his constituency. If it was in his constituency he would not listen to experts. And who is the expert? One small boy from his town---whom we all helped to promote last year. Now the boy advises him that my road should not be tarred before next dry season because he wants to carry out tests in the soil. He has become an earthworm.' I laughed at this. 'Have you ever heard of such a thing? Is this the first road we are tarring in this country? You see why I say that our people are too selfish and too jealous....' I got to know a lot about this road which, incidentally, passes through my own village of Urua. At the time I was naturally sympathetic to Chief Nanga's plans for it, if not with his contempt for expert advice. But of course Chief Nanga said the fellow hadn't been appointed in the first place for his expertise at all. And so it went round and round. But none of these things was real news to me, only his saying that he had ordered ten luxury buses to ply the route as soon as it was tarred. Each would cost him six thousand pounds. So he had two good reasons for wanting the road tarred---next elections and the arrival of his buses. 'It doesn't mean I have sixty thousand pounds in the bank,' he hastened to add. 'I am getting them on never- never arrangement from the British Amalgamated.' I wasn't too sure of the meaning of never-never at that time and I suppose I had a vague idea that the buses were a free gift, which in the circumstances would not have been beyond the British Amalgamated. After a heavy lunch of pounded yam I was feeling very drowsy. As a rule I always slept in the afternoon but in Chief Nanga's house, where things tumbled over one another in a scramble to happen first, an afternoon snooze seemed most improper, if not shameful. And I thought if Chief Nanga could get home at two in the morning, be at his desk at eight and come back at two looking as fresh as a newly-hatched chick why should I, a child of yesterday by comparison, indulge in such a decadent and colonial habit as taking a siesta? So I bravely dozed in my chair while my host and his wife talked about her journey home. She asked if he had found a cook yet to do his meals while she was away and he said he had asked someone to send one or two along in the evening. Only then did it strike me that they had no cook, only a steward. I wondered how they managed with their dinner parties. A car drew up outside and a young American couple breezed in. Or rather the wife breezed in and the husband followed in her wake. 'Hi Micah, hi Margaret,' said the woman. 'Hi Jean, hi John,' replied the Minister whom I had never heard anyone call Micah until then. But he seemed quite pleased, actually. I was greatly shocked. These two people were no older than I and yet had the impudence to call Chief Nanga his now almost forgotten Christian name. But what shocked me even more was his reaction. I had turned quickly and anxiously to watch his face contort with fury. But no. He had replied sweetly, 'Hi Jean, hi John.' I couldn't understand. I was dead certain that if I or any of our people for that matter had called him Micah he would have gone rampaging mad. But perhaps I shouldn't have been so surprised. We have all accepted things from white skins that none of us would have brooked from our own people. Mrs Nanga whose Christian name I hadn't even known until now seemed less happy. She said 'Hallo, hallo,' and almost immediately withdrew, her frock caught in the parting of her buttocks. While Jean flirted eagerly with Micah, I was having some very serious discussions with her husband, who it appeared was one of a team of experts at that time advising our government on how to improve its public image in America. He seemed the quiet type and, I thought, a little cowed by his beautiful, bumptious wife. But I had no doubt they were both in their different ways excellent ambassadors. He certainly proved most eloquent when the inevitable subject came up at last---not, I might add, thanks to me. 'We have our problems,' he said, 'like everyone else. Some of my people are narrow as a pin--we have to admit it. But at the same time we have gotten somewhere. No one is satisfied, but we have made progress.' He gave some facts and figures about lynching which I don't remember now. But I do remember his saying that lynching was not racial in origin and that, up to a certain year like 1875 or something, there had been more whites lynched than negroes. And I remember too his saying that in five of the last ten years there had been no lynchings at all. I noticed he did not say the last five years. 'So you see, Mr... I'm sorry I didn't catch your first name?' 'Odili.' 'Odili---a beautiful sound---may I call you by that?' 'Sure,' I said, already partly Americanized. 'Mine is John. I don't see why we should call one another Mister this and Mister that---like the British.' 'Nor do I,' I said. 'What I was saying,' he went on, 'is that we do not pretend to be perfect. But we have made so much progress lately that I see no cause for anyone to despair. What is important is that we must press on. We must not let up. We just must not be caught sleeping on the switch again...' I was still savouring the unusual but, I thought, excellent technological imagery when I heard as though from faraway John's voice make what I call an astounding claim. I don't mean it was necessarily false---I simply don't know enough history to say. 'America may not be perfect,' he was saying, 'but don't forget that we are the only powerful country in the entire history of the world, the only one, which had the power to conquer others and didn't do it.' I must have looked more surprised than I felt. The claim did not as yet strike me with its full weight. I was thinking that this unique act of magnanimity must have happened in a small corner of the world long ago. 'Yes,' said John, 'in 1945 we could have subdued Russia by placing one atom bomb on Moscow and another on Leningrad. But we didn't. Why? Well, don't ask me. I don't know. Perhaps we are nave. We still believe in such outdated concepts like freedom, like letting every man run his show. Americans have never wished to be involved in anyone else's show....' As I have suggested, there is something in Chief Nanga's person which attracts drama irresistibly to him. Memorable events were always flying about his stately figure and dropping at his feet, as those winged termites driven out of the earth by late rain dance furiously around street lamps and then drop panting to the ground. Here you have John speaking high monologue to me while his wife seems ready, judging by the look in her eyes, to drag Chief Nanga off to bed in broad daylight. Then a knock at the door and a young man in heavily starched white shorts and shirt comes in to offer his services as a cook. 'Wetin you fit cook?' asked Chief Nanga as he perused the young man's sheaf of testimonials, probably not one of them genuine. 'I fit cook every European chop like steak and kidney pie, chicken puri, misk grill, cake omlette....' 'You no sabi cook African chop?' 'Ahh! That one I no sabi am-o,' he admitted. 'I no go tell master lie.' 'Wetin you de chop for your own house?' I asked, being irritated by the idiot. 'Wetin I de chop for my house?' he repeated after me. 'Na we country chop I de chop.' 'You country chop no be Africa chop?' asked Chief Nanga. 'Na him,' admitted the cook. 'But no be me de cook am. I get wife for house.' My irritation vanished at once and I joined Chief Nanga's laughter. Greatly encouraged the cook added: 'How man wey get family go begin enter kitchen for make bitterleaf and egusi? Unless if the man no get shame.' We agreed with him but he lost the job because Chief Nanga preferred bitterleaf and egusi to chicken puri---whatever that was. But I must say the fellow had a point too. As long as a man confined himself to preparing foreign concoctions he could still maintain the comfortable illusion that he wasn't really doing such an unmanly thing as cooking. CHAPTER FIVE Jean and John had invited the Minister and me to an informal dinner on the very Saturday Mrs Nanga left for home. Unfortunately John had had to fly to Abaka at short notice to be present at the opening of a new cement factory built with American capital. In the afternoon Jean phoned to remind us that the party was still on regardless. The Minister promised that we would be there. But just before seven a most sophisticated-looking young woman had driven in and knocked down all our plans. Chief Nanga introduced her as Barrister Mrs Akilo, and she had come that very minute from another town eighty miles away. She said she hadn't even checked in at the hotel or washed off the dust of the journey. I thought she was beautiful enough with the dust on and I remembered the proverbial joke in my village about a certain woman whose daughter was praised for her beauty and she said: 'You haven't seen her yet; wait till she's had a bath.' 'Are you in private practice?' I asked Mrs Akilo as Chief Nanga went to answer the phone. 'Yes, my husband and I practise jointly.' 'Oh, he is a lawyer too?' I asked. 'Yes, we own a firm of solicitors.' I must confess to a certain feeling of awkwardness before her sophisticated, assured manner. The way she spoke she must have spent her childhood in England. But this awkward feeling was only momentary. After all, I told myself, Chief Nanga who was barely literate was probably going to sleep with her that night. 'Look, Agnes, why don't you use my wife's bedroom instead of wasting money,' said Chief Nanga getting back to his seat. 'She travelled home today.' His phonetics had already moved up two rungs to get closer to hers. It would have been pathetic if you didn't know that he was having fun. 'Thank you, M.A. But I think I had better go to the International. Maybe you could come and pick me up for dinner?' 'Certainly---at what time?' 'Eightish, to give me time to wash and put my feet up for a few minutes.' I was naturally beginning to fear that I was going to be left alone in an empty seven bedroom mansion on a Saturday night. I thought my host had clean forgotten our dinner appointment. But he hadn't. As soon as Mrs Akilo left he said he would take me to the other place before going to the International and he was sure Jean would bring me back. 'Agnes is She who must be obeyed,' he quoted. I wondered whether he would also quote Rider Haggard---or whoever wrote those memorable words---to Jean, but all he said was that something urgent had cropped up. Jean was naturally very disappointed. Still she agreed with her characteristic eagerness to run me home at the end of the party, or get some other guest to do so. The dinner would have come into the category which Mrs Nanga called 'nine pence talk and three pence chop'. But the talk wasn't bad. Jean started us all off nicely by declaring ecstatically that one of the most attractive things about Chief Nanga apart from his handsomeness was his unpredictability. 'If you ask him if he is coming to dinner he says I will try.' 'How sweet!' said a middle-aged woman, I think British, matching her words with a gentle sideways tilt of the head in my direction. 'I just love pidgin English.' 'I will try,' Jean continued, 'can mean a whole lot of things. It may mean that he won't come--like tonight---or that he might turn up with three other people.' 'How intriguing,' said the other woman again. And it was only then I began to suspect she was being sarcastic. Apart from Jean and me there were five others in the room---the British woman and her husband, a middle-aged American negro writing a book about our country and a white American couple. Dinner was rice and groundnut stew with chicken. I found it altogether too heavy for that time of day. But the sweet was very good, perhaps on account of its being new to me. I don't remember now what they called it. As for coffee I never touch it at night, unless I have reason for wanting to keep awake. At the University we used to call it the academic nightcap. The talk, as I said, was very good. My closeness to the Minister gave everything I said heightened significance. And---I don't know whether this happens to other people, but the knowledge that I am listened to attentively works in a sort of virtuous circle to improve the quality of what I say. For instance when at a certain point the conversation turned on art appreciation I made what I still think was a most valid and timely intervention. One of our leading artists had just made an enormous wooden figure of a god for a public square in Bori. I had not seen it yet but had read a lot about it. In fact it had attracted so much attention that it soon became fashionable to say it was bad or un-African. The Englishman was now saying that it lacked something or other. 'I was pleased the other day,' he said, 'as I drove past it to see one very old woman in uncontrollable rage shaking her fists at the sculpture...' 'Now that's very interesting,' said someone. 'Well, it's more than that,' said the other. 'You see this old woman, quite an illiterate pagan, who most probably worshipped this very god herself; unlike our friend trained in European art schools; this old lady is in a position to know...' 'Quite.' It was then I had my flash of insight. 'Did you say she was shaking her fist?' I asked. 'In that case you got her meaning all wrong. Shaking the fist in our society is a sign of great honour and respect; it means that you attribute power to the person or object.' Which of course is quite true. And if I may digress a little, I have, since this incident, come up against another critic who committed a crime in my view because he transferred to an alien culture the same meanings and interpretation that his own people attach to certain gestures and facial expression. This critic, a Frenchman writing in a glossy magazine on African art said of a famous religious mask from this country: 'Note the half-closed eyes, sharply drawn and tense eyebrow, the ecstatic and passionate mouth...' It was simply scandalous. All that the mask said, all that it felt for mankind was a certain superb, divine detachment and disdain. If I met a woman in the street and she looked at me with the face of that mask that would be its meaning. But to return to the dinner party. Having demolished the art pundit I felt my reputation soar. I became more than just someone spending his holidays with the Minister of Culture. The white American couple--especially the wife---practically hung on my every word. They wanted to know whether I had trained in Britain, what I had read at the University, what I taught at the Anata Grammar School, had I been to the United States, what did I think of Americans? etc. etc. But the best story of that evening came from the negro writer. He told us how a white American had once come up to his lunch table at the International Hotel which, as everyone knows, is a kind of international mart for the sale to our people of all kinds of foreign wares, from ideologies to tractors. This white American came up and said, full of respect: 'May I join you, sir?' 'Sure,' replied the other. 'What do you think of the Peace Corps?' 'I've nothing against it. One of my daughters is in it.' 'You American?' 'Sure. I came over....' I thought this was good. I could see the other man promptly excusing himself and searching other tables for authentic Africans. When dinner was over the American negro offered to drop me off and save Jean the trouble but she wouldn't hear of it, much to my relief I must say. She said she had promised the Minister to deliver me personally safe and sound at his doorstep and in any case she wanted a bit of fresh air before turning in. And so the others left---almost in a bunch. 'I guess we better be going,' said Jean, clasping her hands above her head and stretching. 'But we've hardly said a word to each other,' I said. Jean went and put on a record, a long-play highlife and we began to dance. I must say she had learnt to do the highlife well except that like many another foreign enthusiast of African rhythm she tended to overdo the waist wiggle. I don't say I found it unpleasant---quite on the contrary; I only make a general point, which I think is interesting. It all goes back to what others have come to associate us with. And let it be said that we are not entirely blameless in this. I remember how we were outraged at the University to see a film of breast-throwing, hip-jerking, young women which a neighbouring African state had made and was showing abroad as an African ballet. Jean probably saw it in America. But whatever the case her present effort though pleasing and suitable in the circumstances was by no means good highlife which in essence might carry the same message, but not in this heavy, unsubtle, altogether unsophisticated way. While we danced I had a quick lesson in psychology. Apparently Jean had noticed while we talked after dinner that I was shaking my legs, which meant that I wanted so badly to go to bed with some woman. 'Was it me or Elsie you wanted?' 'Elsie?' 'Yes, the American couple---Elsie Jackson.' 'Oh, I see. No, it wasn't her at all. Good Lord, no. It was you.' Which was true. Actually the leg-shaking business was entirely news to me, the interpretation of it, I mean. As far as I could remember I had always done it and when I was a little boy Mama used to rebuke me for courting epilepsy. I don't remember whether we danced more than one number on the LP---I very much doubt it. What I remember clearly was the sudden ringing of the bedside telephone. If someone had tiptoed up the stairs in the dark and stuck a knife in my back it couldn't have hit me more. 'Don't move,' commanded Jean, bracing me firmly from below with a surprisingly strong pair of arms. I obeyed. Then with me and all on her she began to wriggle on her back towards the telephone. She picked up the receiver and called her name. Had she just taken holy communion and been returning to her pew her manner couldn't have appeared more calm and relaxed. 'Hi, Elsie.... No, you're welcome.... I'm glad you enjoyed it. I got him home all right... I was just getting back...' She replaced and put all her suppressed anger in calling Elsie a bitch at which we both convulsed with laughter. 'All she wants to know is if you're still here.' 'Do you think she knows?' 'I don't think so and don't care.' Later, much later, we went down hand in hand to the kitchen for Jean to make coffee. I didn't mind drinking it then. 'Sex means much more to a woman than to a man,' said Jean reflectively stirring her cup. 'Does it?' 'Sure. It takes place inside her. The man uses a mere projection of himself.' 'I see.' I wished I could tell her to stop chattering but I didn't know her enough yet. I don't mind people talking before or during it, but I do object most strongly to a postmortem. One should drink coffee silently or smoke or just sit. Or if one must talk then choose some unrelated subject. I think Jean sensed my feeling; she was such a clever woman. It was about one-thirty when I caught her trying to suppress a yawn. 'I think I had better be going. Sorry to take you out at this time of night.' 'Don't be so British,' she said almost vehemently. I wondered what was so British about what I had just said and why it should hurt her so much, but decided against pursuing the matter. As she looked for her car key she asked if I must get back right away or would I like to come with her for a short drive through the town. 'Bori at night is simply fascinating,' she said. 'But aren't you tired?' 'You bet I'm not.' She certainly knew the city well, from the fresh-smelling, modern water-front to the stinking, maggoty interior. 'How long have you been in this country?' I asked in undisguised admiration. 'Eleven months,' she said. 'If you like a place it doesn't take very long to know it.' We drove through wide, well-lit streets bearing the names of our well-known politicians and into obscure lanes named after some unknown small fish. Even insignificant city councillors (Jean apparently knew them all) had their little streets---I remember one called Stephen Awando Street. Going through some of these back streets would have convinced me, had I needed convincing, that the City Clerk's notice about pails was indeed a live issue. I began to wonder whether Jean actually enjoyed driving through these places as she claimed she did or whether she had some secret reason, like wanting me to feel ashamed about my country's capital city. I hardly knew her but I could see she was that kind of person, a most complicated woman. We were now back in the pleasant high-class area. 'That row of ten houses belongs to the Minister of Construction,' she said. 'They are let to different embassies at three thousand a year each.' So what, I said within myself. Your accusation may be true but you've no right to make it. Leave it to us and don't contaminate our cause by espousing it. 'But that's another Chief Nanga Street,' I said aloud, pointing to my left. 'No. What we saw near the fountain was Chief Nanga Avenue,' she said and we both burst out laughing, friends again. 'I'm not sure there isn't a Road as well somewhere,' she said. 'I know there is a Circle.' Then I promptly recoiled again. Who the hell did she think she was to laugh so self-righteously. Wasn't there more than enough in her own country to keep her laughing all her days? Or crying if she preferred it? 'I have often wondered,' she said completely insensitive to my silent resentment, 'why don't they call some streets after the many important names in your country's history or past events like your independence as they do in France and other countries?' 'Because this is not France but Africa,' I said with peevish defiance. She obviously thought I was being sarcastic and laughed again. But what I had said was another way of telling her to go to hell. Now I guessed I knew why she took so much delight in driving through our slums. She must have taken hundreds of photographs already to send home to her relations. And, come to think of it, would she--lover of Africa that she was---would she be found near a black man in her own country? 'When do you expect John back?' I asked, burning with anger. 'Wednesday. Why?' 'I was wondering whether I could see you again.' 'Do you want to?' 'Sure.' 'Why not? Let me call you tomorrow?' CHAPTER SIX Anyone who has followed this story at all carefully may well be wondering what had become of the Elsie whom I said was one of my chief reasons for going to Bori. Well, that chief reason had not altered in the least. I had in fact written to her as soon as I had arrived and then paid her a visit at the hospital on the following Saturday morning. But she was still on night-duty and had been woken up from sleep---against the rules of her hospital---to see me. So that first visit had had to be very short. Actually the reason I went at all was to confirm that she was coming to the house to spend the two free days she would earn after the night-shift and that she was bringing a friend of hers along for Chief Nanga, although we did not spell it out so crudely. In our country a long American car driven by a white- uniformed chauffeur and flying a ministerial flag could pass through the eye of a needle. The hospital gateman had promptly levered up the iron barrier and saluted. The elderly male nurse I beckoned to had sprinted forward with an agility that you would think had left him at least a decade ago. And as I said earlier, although it was against all the laws of the hospital they had let me into the female nurses' quarters and woken up Elsie to see me. Although she was obviously very drowsy her unconcealed pleasure tempted me very strongly to stay longer than was reasonable or fair. Her sleeping head-tie hooded her face almost down to the eyebrows and completely covered both ears. But despite this and the sleep swollen eyes she was as desirable as ever. And she was ready---it was just like her---to start rushing around looking for a soft drink and biscuits for me. I refused quite firmly. In fact I was already on my feet when the other girl came in to greet me. She obviously did not feel as confident as Elsie about her looks and had taken time to touch up. I tried very hard but could not recollect her face at all, even though Elsie said she had introduced us at a university party. She was reasonably good-looking but in that pointed mandibular way that made me think of the talkative weaver bird. Yet she hardly said a word; and when I finally rose to go she did not even go with us to the car outside. Strangely uncurious for one of our women, I thought. As Elsie and I walked to the car I said humorously: 'I hope Chief Nanga won't ask for a swop.' 'For what?' she asked with a puzzled look. Then it occurred to me that she might never have heard that word and so I explained, and we laughed. 'I thought you meant the cotton-wool we use in the theatre,' she said, and we laughed again. Then she remembered to add graciously that a swop would not be necessary as her friend was the more beautiful of the two. 'If you are looking for flattery from me this afternoon you won't get it,' I said, stooping at the door which the chauffeur had been holding open since I first emerged from the night nurses' dormitory. 'By the way,' I said backing out and straightening up again, 'I met an American lady called Elsie at a party the other night.... Whenever her name was called---my mind went to you.' 'Who tell am say na Elsie be im name? When you see am again make you tell am say im own Elsie na counterfeit. But Odili, you self na waa! How you no even reach Bori finish you done de begin meet another Elsie for party? Make you take am je-je-o.' 'Relax,' I said, imitating Jean. 'What is wrong in telling you I met your namesake at a party?' Actually I was pleased to see Elsie jealous. I meant to go on to say, and had in fact half opened my mouth to begin saying, that she needn't worry, that the other Elsie was no patch on her. But I quickly changed my mind for tactical reasons. Instead I said that if I wanted a second girl-friend I would pick one with a different name if only to avoid confusion. 'Na lie,' she said, smiling her seductive, two-dimpled smile. 'The way I look you eye I fit say that even ten Elsies no fit belleful you.' 'Nonsense,' I said. 'Abi dem take Elsie make juju for me?' I asked, laughing. 'I know?' she shrugged. 'You suppose to know,' I said. The chauffeur dropped a very broad---and rude---hint at this point by shutting my door again. I chose to ignore him. 'Wetin be the name of your friend's car?' 'Cadillac.' 'Ah! This na the famous Cadillac? I no think say I done see am before.' She was full of girlish excitement. 'Na tough car! Eje-je-je! You think say these people go go another heaven after this?' 'My sister I no know-o. Any way make we follow them chop small for dis world.' I opened the door myself and went in, and she helped close it. 'I'll be here on Thursday then---at four. Run along now and sleep, darling.' I sat back with a proprietary air unusual for me. She stood waving until we disappeared round the bend. That Thursday evening at six the Minister was due to open the first ever book exhibition of works by local authors. I was specially interested in it because I had ambitions to write a novel about the coming of the first white men to my district. He came back for lunch at around two-thirty clutching the speech they had prepared for him. Apparently he had been so busy at the office that he hadn't had time to look at it at all. So I thought he was going to sit down now and quickly run through it; but no, he put the file away on top of a book-shelf and began to ask about our trip to the hospital. I hadn't realized till then---and perhaps Chief Nanga himself hadn't---that he was going with me. 'I hope they will be ready when we get there....' 'Yes. I told Elsie you had to be at this other place at six.' 'Tell me something, Odili. How serious are you about this girl Elsie?' 'You mean about marriage.... Good lord, no! She is just a good-time girl.' 'Kabu---Kabu?' he asked with a twinkle in his eye. 'Yes, sort of,' I said. Although what I said about marriage was true enough yet it was grossly unfair at that stage in my relationship with Elsie to call her simply a good-time girl. I suppose what happened was that Chief Nanga and I having already swopped many tales of conquest I felt somehow compelled to speak in derogatory terms about women in general. In fact I had already told the story of my first meeting with Elsie without however identifying her. Naturally Chief Nanga had five stories to every one of mine. The best I thought was about the young married woman who never took her brassire off. It was not until after many encounters that Chief Nanga managed to extract from her that her husband (apparently a very jealous man) had put some juju on her breasts to scare her into faithfulness; his idea being presumably that she would not dare to expose that part of her to another man much less other parts. 'What a fool!' I said. 'And he was trying to be so clever.' 'E fool pass garri,' said Chief Nanga. 'Which person tell am na bobby them de take do the thing? Nonsense.' 'But that woman na waa,' I said. 'Who put that kind sense for im head?' 'Woman?' rhapsodized Chief Nanga. 'Any person wey tell you say woman no get sense just de talk pure jargon. When woman no want do something e go lef am, but make you no fool yourself say e left the thing because e no get sense for do am.' How true, I thought. It had been a bit of a surprise to me when Chief Nanga had announced he was coming with me to the hospital. I couldn't very well advise him coldly to stay behind and read through his speech. But I had a strong suspicion he had forgotten all about it and I felt it was only fair that I should remind him. I considered various approaches and then decided on the one that seemed to me to conceal most satisfactorily the small element of self-interest. 'I wish I could help in any way with checking your speech,' I said. 'But I just cannot read in a moving car.' 'Oh! that speech,' he said wearily. 'I shall finish it in ten minutes; it is not important. If I had known I should have asked my Parliamentary Secretary to go and represent me. Anyhow it's not bad. Talking is now in my blood---from teaching into politics---all na so so talk talk.' Actually I had no serious reason for wanting to go alone. It was true I had formed a pretty clear mental picture of how it was all going to happen, as it were, under my command; but it didn't really matter and certainly wouldn't hurt anyone if it happened differently. For instance, it would have been rather nice sitting between the two girls at the back. Now I would probably sit with the chauffeur. Or better, Elsie and I could sit in front---there was enough space really---and leave the back to the Minister to get acquainted with the other girl. As it happened all my worry was wasted. The other girl---I don't know what I've done with that girl's name---couldn't come with us on account of a sudden illness. I was very disappointed and a little angry even though Elsie had sworn it was a genuine illness. Fortunately Chief Nanga didn't seem to mind at all, which was hardly surprising for a man who had so many women ready to make themselves available. I remember him announcing twice or thrice on our way back, with Elsie sitting between us, that he had an important Cabinet meeting which would probably last all night tomorrow, and that he must try and get some sleep tonight. At first I thought he was just showing off to the girl and then I decided it was his wicked way of saying that the coast was completely clear for us. So in my gratitude I began to tell Elsie how little time he spared for himself and his family. 'If somebody wan make you minister,' said Chief Nanga, coming to my support, 'make you no gree. No be good life.' 'Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown,' said Elsie. 'Na true, my sister,' said the Chief. 'I think I tell you say Chief Nanga de go open book exhibition for six today,' I said. 'Book exhibition?' asked Elsie. 'How they de make that one again?' 'My sister, make you de ask them for me-o. I be think say na me one never hear that kind thing before. But they say me na Minister of Culture and as such I suppose to be there. I no fit say no. Wetin be Minister? No be public football? So instead for me to sidon rest for house like other people I de go knack grammar for this hot afternoon. You done see this kind trouble before?' We all laughed, including the driver whose face I could see in the mirror. We joked and laughed all the way back. In Chief Nanga's company it was impossible not to be merry. We were met outside the exhibition hall by the President of the Writers' Society, a fellow I used to know fairly well at the University. In those days before he became a writer he had seemed reasonably normal to me. But apparently since he published his novel The Song of the Black Bird---he had become quite different. I read an interview he gave to a popular magazine in which it came out that he had become so non-conformist that he now designed his own clothes. Judging by his appearance I should say he also tailored them. He had on a white and blue squarish gown, with a round neck and no buttons, over brown, striped, baggy trousers made from the kind of light linen material we sometimes called Obey the Wind. He also had a long, untidy beard. I had expected that in a country where writers were so few they would all be known personally to the Minister of Culture. But it was clear Chief Nanga hadn't even heard the man's name before. 'He is the author of The Song of the Black Bird,' I said. 'I see,' replied Chief Nanga, whose attention was clearly elsewhere at that moment. 'So your society includes musicians as well?' he asked in one fleeting return of interest. But by the time Jalio said 'no', his attention had again strayed from us. 'Hello, Jalio,' I said, stretching my hand to shake him almost in commiseration. He replied hello and took my hand but obviously he did not remember my name and didn't seem to care particularly. I was very much hurt by this and immediately formed a poor opinion of him and his silly airs. 'You didn't tell me, Mr---er...' began the Minister abruptly. 'Jalio, sir.' 'Thank you, Mr Jalio. Why didn't you tell me that you are expecting ambassadors at this function?' His eyes were still ranging over the parked cars, some of them carrying diplomatic number plates and two flying flags. 'I am sorry, sir,' said Mr Jalio, 'but...' 'And you come to chairman such an occasion like this?' He accompanied the last two words with an upward movement of a scornful left finger, taking in the whole of Mr Jalio's person. 'What part of the country are you?' he asked. I didn't know what to feel. If Jalio hadn't carried those pretentious airs my sympathies would certainly have stayed with him but now I must confess I was a little pleased to see him deflated. 'Is that what you call national dress in your place?' pursued Chief Nanga mercilessly. 'I dress to please myself, sir,' said the writer becoming suddenly defiant. 'Let me tell you,' said Chief Nanga in a softened but firm tone. 'If you want me to attend any of your functions you must wear a proper dress. Either you wear a suit... or if you don't like it you can wear our national costume. That is correct protocol.' It was getting quite embarrassing for me especially when Chief Nanga mentioned a suit and turned to nod approvingly in my direction; for much as I disliked Jalio's pretentiously bizarre habit, still I did not care to be set up as a model of correct dressing. Then suddenly adopting a paternal and conciliatory tone Chief Nanga reminded us young people that we were the future leaders of our great country. 'I don't care if you respect me or not,' he said, 'but our people have a saying that if you respect today's king others will respect you when your turn comes.... We better go in.' In spite of this inauspicious beginning Mr Jalio went ahead and said many flattering things about Chief Nanga, albeit with a clouded face. He said it was a fitting and appropriate tribute to his concern for African Culture---a concern which was known all over the world---that a university in far-away America was soon to honour him with a doctorate degree. Chief Nanga stood up magnificently and drew up the sleeves of his robes back to his shoulders with two deft movements of his arms. He did not plunge right away into his prepared script but first made a few remarks of his own. He turned sideways to thank the President of the Writers' Society, looking him over for half a second so that I was afraid he might revert to the subject of dress. Fortunately he did not; he smiled indulgently and a little wickedly and said he was honoured to be invited by Mr Jalio to open the exhibition. 'As you know Mr Jalio is the President of this Society which has already done much to project the African Personality. I believe Mr Jalio himself has composed a brilliant song called... erm... What is it called again?' he asked Mr Jalio. Fortunately this was mistaken for witticism and was greeted with loud laughter. It was from her vivacious laugh then that I noticed Jean sitting in the row in front of Elsie and me. Her husband, John, was sitting by her; I hadn't realized he was back. I whispered into Elsie's ear that that was the woman who gave the party I spoke about. 'Is she the famous Elsie?' she whispered back. 'No, her friend.' 'So no be only one, even,' she said, smiling, 'Odi the great.' She often shortened my name to Odi. I didn't listen much to Chief Nanga's speech. When Elsie and I were not whispering into each other's ears I was thinking about the night or even about such irrelevant things as the dress of some of the people in the room. There was one man I noticed particularly. His robes were made from some expensive-looking, European woollen material---which was not so very strange these days. But what surprised me was that the tailor had retained the cloth's thin, yellow border on which the manufacturer advertised in endless and clear black type: 100% WOOL: MADE IN ENGLAND. In fact the tailor had used this advertisement to ornamental advantage on both sleeves. I was struck once again by our people's endless resourcefulness especially when it came to taste in clothes. I noticed that whenever the man hitched up his sleeves which he did every two or three minutes he did it very carefully so that the quality of his material would not be lost in the many rich folds of the dress. He also wore a gold chain round his neck. CHAPTER SEVEN Chief Nanga was a born politician; he could get away with almost anything he said or did. And as long as men are swayed by their hearts and stomachs and not their heads the Chief Nangas of this world will continue to get away with anything. He had that rare gift of making people feel---even while he was saying harsh things to them---that there was not a drop of ill will in his entire frame. I remember the day he was telling his ministerial colleague over the telephone in my presence that he distrusted our young university people and that he would rather work with a European. I knew I was hearing terrible things but somehow I couldn't bring myself to take the man seriously. He had been so open and kind to me and not in the least distrustful. The greatest criticism a man like him seemed capable of evoking in our country was an indulgent: 'Make you no min' am.' This is of course a formidable weapon which is always guaranteed to save its wielder from the normal consequences of misconduct as well as from the humiliation and embarrassment of ignorance. For how else could you account for the fact that a Minister of Culture announced in public that he had never heard of his country's most famous novel and received applause---as indeed he received again later when he prophesied that before long our great country would produce great writers like Shakespeare, Dickens, Jane Austen, Bernard Shaw and---raising his eyes off the script---Michael West and Dudley Stamp. At the end of the function Mr Jalio and the Editor of the Daily Matchet came forward to congratulate him and to ask for copies of the speech. Chief Nanga produced two clean copies from his file, bent down at the table and amended the relevant portions in his own fair hand by the addition of those two names to the list of famous English writers. I knew the Editor already from a visit he had paid the Minister a few days earlier. A greasylooking man, he had at first seemed uneasy about my presence in the room and I had kept a sharp look out for the slightest hint from Chief Nanga to get up and leave them. But no hint was given. On the contrary I felt he positively wanted me to stay. So I stayed. Our visitor took a very long time to come to the point, whatever it was. All I could gather was that he had access to something which he was holding back in Chief Nanga's interest. But it was clear that the Minister did not attach very great importance to whatever it was; in fact he appeared to be sick and tired of the man but dared not say so. Meanwhile the journalist told us one story after another, a disgusting white foam appearing at the corners of his mouth. He drank two bottles of beer, smoked many cigarettes and then got a 'dash' of five pounds from the Minister after an account of his trouble with his landlord over arrears of rent. Apparently it was not a straightforward case of debt but, since the landlord and the journalist came from different tribes, the element of tribalism could not be ruled out. 'You see what it means to be a minister,' said Chief Nanga as soon as his visitor left. His voice sounded strangely tired and I felt suddenly sorry for him. This was the nearest I had seen him come to despondency. 'If I don't give him something now, tomorrow he will go and write rubbish about me. They say it is the freedom of the Press. But to me it is nothing short of the freedom to crucify innocent men and assassinate their character. I don't know why our government is so afraid to deal with them. I don't say they should not criticize---after all no one is perfect except God---but they should criticize constructively....' So that other afternoon when the journalist came forward to get a copy of the speech and shouted: 'First rate, sir; I shall put it in the front page instead of a story I have promised the Minister of Construction,' I just wondered if he ever suspected where he and his stories would be if Chief Nanga had his way. It must have been about eight o'clock---it was certainly dark---when we left the exhibition to drive back home. As soon as the car moved I dovetailed my fingers into Elsie's on her lap and threw the other arm across her shoulders in a bold, proprietary gesture. 'That was a beautiful speech and you didn't have much time to go over it,' I said, just to get some talk going while privately I throbbed with expectation. An image that had never until then entered my mind appeared to me now. I saw Elsie---or rather didn't see her---as she merged so completely with the darkness of my room, unlike Jean who had remained half undissolved like some apparition as she put her things on in the dark. 'When an old woman hears the dance she knows her old age deserts her,' replied Chief Nanga in our language. I laughed more loudly than the proverb deserved and then translated it for Elsie who spoke a different language. We used the laughter to get a little closer so that the arm I had over her shoulder slipped under her arm to her breast, and I pressed her against my side. When we got back, Chief Nanga and I had whisky while Elsie went upstairs to change. Incidentally, when on our first return from the hospital Chief Nanga had told his steward to take Elsie's bags to his absent wife's room I had been greatly alarmed. But then I had quickly reassured myself that he was merely displaying great tact and delicacy, and I felt grateful just as I had done when he had told us of the all-night Cabinet meeting. There was only a short flight of stairs between my room on the ground floor and where Elsie was being installed. When all was silent I would go up quietly, tap on her door, find her waiting and take her downstairs to my room, and we could pretend that our host was none the wiser. We had an excellent dinner of rice, ripe plantains and fried fish. Elsie, looking ripe and ready in a shimmering yellow dress, took us back to the President of the Writers' Association and his funny garb. I found myself putting up a feeble kind of defence. 'Writers and artists sometimes behave that way,' I said. 'I think he will heed my advice,' said Chief Nanga. 'He is a well-comported young man.' This surprised me a great deal. I suppose it was Jalio's flattering words in introducing the Minister that did it; or more likely Chief Nanga had not missed the almost deferential manner in which one of the ambassadors had approached Jalio with a copy of his book for an autograph. I remember looking at Chief Nanga then and seeing astonishment and unbelief on his face, but I did not think it was enough to persuade him to call Jalio 'a well-comported young man' so soon after their clash. The words 'well-comported' struck me almost as forcibly as the sentiment they conveyed. I couldn't say whether it was right or wrong, and in any case you felt once again that such distinctions didn't apply here. Chief Nanga was one of those fortunate ones who had just enough English (and not one single word more) to have his say strongly, without inhibition, and colourfully. I remember his telling me of a 'fatal accident' he once had driving from Anata to Bori. Since he was alive I had assumed that someone else had been killed. But as the story unfolded I realized that 'fatal' meant no more than 'very serious'. I retired soon after dinner so that the others might take the cue. And Elsie did. The second time I peeped out she was no longer there in the sitting-room. But Chief Nanga sat on stolidly looking at the file of the speech he had already given. Every two minutes or so I came to the door and peeped out and there he was. Could he be asleep? No, his eyes seemed to be moving across the page. I was getting quite angry. Why didn't he take the blessed file to his study? But perhaps what hurt me most was the fact that I could not muster up sufficient bravado to step into the sitting-room and up the stairs. Perhaps he even expected me to do so. Let me say that I do not normally lack resolution in this kind of situation; but Chief Nanga had, as it were, cramped my style from the very first by introducing an element of delicacy into the affair, thus making it not so much a question of my own resolution as of my willingness to parade Elsie before a third person as a common slut. So there was nothing for it but wait in anger. I sat on my bed, got up again and paced my room barefoot and in pyjamas. It seemed a full hour before Chief Nanga finally switched the lights off and turned in. I gave him about five to ten minutes to settle down in his bed while I had time to steady myself from the strain of the last hour and the unsettling effect which imminent fulfilment always has on me. Then I began to tiptoe upstairs running my palm up the wooden railing for guidance. By the time I got to the landing my eyes were fairly at home in the darkness and it was easy finding Elsie's door. My hand was already on the knob when I heard voices within. I was transfixed to the spot. Then I heard laughter and immediately turned round and went down the stairs again. I did not go into my room straight away but stood for long minutes in the sitting-room. What went on in my mind at that time lacked form and I cannot now set it down. But I remember finally deciding that I was jumping to conclusions, that Chief Nanga had in all probability simply opened the connecting door between the two rooms to say good-night and exchange a few pleasantries. I decided to give him a minute or two more, and then discarding this pussy-footed business go up boldly and knock on Elsie's door. I went back to my room to wait, switched on the bedside lamp which was worked by a short silvery rope instead of a normal switch, looked at my watch which I had taken off and put on a bedside stool. It was already past half-past ten. This stung me into activity again. I hadn't thought it was so late. I rushed into the sitting-room and made to bound up the stairs when I heard as from a great distance Elsie deliriously screaming my name. I find it difficult in retrospect to understand my inaction at that moment. A sort of paralysis had spread over my limbs, while an intense pressure was building up inside my chest. But before it reached raging point I felt it siphoned off, leaving me empty inside and out. I trudged up the stairs in the incredible delusion that Elsie was calling on me to come and save her from her ravisher. But when I got to the door a strong revulsion and hatred swept over me and I turned sharply away and went down the stairs for the last time. I sat on my bed and tried to think, with my head in my hands. But a huge sledgehammer was beating down on my brain as on an anvil and my thoughts were scattering sparks. I soon realized that what was needed was action; quick, sharp action. I rose to my feet and willed myself about gathering my things into the suitcase. I had no clear idea what I would do next, but for the moment that did not trouble me; the present loomed so large. I brought down my clothes one at a time from the wardrobe, folded them and packed them neatly; then I brought my things from the bathroom and put them away. These simple operations must have taken me a long time to complete. In all that time I did not think anything particularly. I just bit my lower lip until it was sore. Occasionally words like 'Good Heavens' escaped me and came out aloud. When I had finished packing I slumped down in the chair and then got up again and went out into the sitting-room to see if the sounds were still coming. But all was now dark and quiet upstairs. 'My word!' I remember saying; then I went to wait for Elsie. For I knew she would come down shedding tears of shame and I would kick her out and bang the door after her for ever. I waited and waited and then, strange as it may sound, dozed off. When I started awake I had that dull, heavy terror of knowing that something terrible had happened without immediately remembering what it was. Of course the uncertainty lasted only one second, or less. Recollection and panic followed soon enough and then the humiliating wound came alive again and began to burn more fresh than when first inflicted. My watch said a few minutes past four. And Elsie had not come. My eyes misted, a thing that had not happened to me in God knows how long. Anyway the tears hung back. I took off my pyjamas, got into other clothes and left the room by the private door. I walked for hours, keeping to the well-lit streets. The dew settled on my head and helped to numb my feeling. Soon my nose began to run and as I hadn't brought a handkerchief I blew it into the roadside drain by closing each nostril in turn with my first finger. As dawn came my head began to clear a little and I saw Bori stirring. I met a night- soil man carrying his bucket of ordure on top of a battered felt hat drawn down to hood his upper face while his nose and mouth were masked with a piece of black cloth like a gangster. I saw beggars sleeping under the eaves of luxurious department stores and a lunatic sitting wide awake by the basket of garbage he called his possession. The first red buses running empty passed me and I watched the street lights go off finally around six. I drank in all these details with the early morning air. It was strange perhaps that a man who had so much on his mind should find time to pay attention to these small, inconsequential things; it was like the man in the proverb who was carrying the carcass of an elephant on his head and searching with his toes for a grasshopper. But that was how it happened. It seems that no thought---no matter how great---had the power to exclude all others. As I walked back to the house I tried in vain to find the kind of words I needed to speak to Chief Nanga. As for Elsie I should have known that she was a common harlot and the less said about her the better. Chief Nanga was outside his gate apparently looking out for me when I came round the last bend. He happened just then to be looking in the opposite direction and did not see me at once. My first reaction on seeing him was to turn back. Fortunately I did not give in to that kind of panic; in any case he turned round just then, saw me and began to come towards me. 'Where have you been, Odili?' he asked. 'We---I---have been looking for you; I nearly phoned nine-nine- nine.' 'Please don't talk to me again,' I said. 'What...! Wonders will never end! What is wrong, Odili?' 'I said don't talk to me again,' I replied as coolly as possible. 'Wonders will never end! Is it about the girl? But you told me you are not serious with her; I asked you because I don't like any misunderstanding.... And I thought you were tired and had gone to sleep...' 'Look here, Mr Nanga, respect yourself. Don't provoke me any more unless you want our names to come out in the newspapers today.' Even to myself I sounded strange. Chief Nanga was really taken aback, especially when I called him mister. 'You have won today,' I continued, 'but watch it, I will have the last laugh. I never forget.' Elsie was standing at the door with arms folded across her bust when I came in at the gate. She immediately rushed indoors and disappeared. When I brought out my suitcase Chief Nanga, who had not said another word since I insulted him, came forward and tried to put a hand on my shoulder in one last effort at reconciliation. 'Don't touch me!' I eased my shoulders away like one avoiding a leper's touch. He immediately recoiled; his smile hardened on his face and I was happy. 'Don't be childish, Odili,' he said paternally. 'After all she is not your wife. What is all this nonsense? She told me there is nothing between you and she, and you told me the same thing... But anyway I am sorry if you are offended; the mistake is mine. I tender unreserved apology. If you like I can bring you six girls this evening. You go do the thing sotay you go beg say you no want again. Ha, ha, ha, ha!' 'What a country!' I said. 'You call yourself Minister of Culture. God help us.' And I spat; not a full spit but a token, albeit unmistakable, one. 'Look here, Odili,' he turned on me then like an incensed leopard, 'I will not stomach any nonsense from any small boy for the sake of a common woman, you hear? If you insult me again I will show you pepper. You young people of today are very ungrateful. Imagine! Anyway don't insult me again-o....' 'You can't do fuck-all,' I said. 'You are just a bush...' I cut myself short and walked out, lumbering my suitcase past Dogo the one-eyed stalwart who had presumably heard our voices and come out from the Boys' Quarters in his sleeping loin-cloth to investigate. 'Na this boy de halla so for master im face?' I heard him ask. 'Don't mind the stupid idiot,' said Chief Nanga. 'E no fit insult master like that here and comot free. Hey! My frien'!' he shouted, coming after me. 'Are you there?' His voice was full of menace. I was then half-way to the outside gate. I turned boldly round but on second thoughts said nothing, turned again and continued. 'Leave am, Dogo. Make e carry im bad luck de go. Na my own mistake for bring am here. Ungrateful ingrate!' I was now at the gate but his voice was loud and I heard every word. I took a taxi to my friend Maxwell's address. Maxwell Kulamo, a lawyer, had been my classmate at the Grammar School. We called him Kulmax or Cool Max in those days; and his best friends still did. He was the Poet Laureate of our school and I still remember the famous closing couplet of the poem he wrote when our school beat our rivals in the Inter-collegiate Soccer Competition: Hurrah! to our unconquerable full backs. (The writer of these lines is Cool Max.) He was already fully dressed for Court (striped trousers and black coat) and was eating breakfast when I arrived. The few words I spoke to Nanga and the fairly long taxi ride had combined to make it possible for me to wear a passable face. 'Good gracious!' Max shouted, shaking my hand violently. 'Diligent! Na your eye be this?' Diligent was a version of Odili I had borne at school. 'Cool Max!' I greeted him in return. 'The writer of these lines!' We laughed and laughed and the tears I had not shed last night came to my eyes. Max suspected nothing and even thought I was just coming from home. I told him rather shamefacedly that I had been in town for the past few days but hadn't found it possible to contact him. He took this to be a reference to his having no telephone in the house, a fact which in turn could be a reflection on his practice. 'I have been on the waiting list for a telephone for two months,' he said defensively. 'You see, I have not given anyone a bribe, and I don't know any big gun... So you have been staying with that corrupt, empty-headed, illiterate capitalist. Sorry-o.' 'Na matter of can't help,' I said. 'He na my old teacher, you know.' I was dipping my bread in the cup of hot cocoa drink Max's boy had made for me. Chief Nanga and Elsie already seemed so distant that I could have talked about them like casual acquaintances. But I was not going to delay Max by talking now. And in any case I had no wish to make him think that I only remembered him when I could no longer enjoy the flesh-pots of Chief Nanga's home. Within minutes I was already feeling so relaxed and at ease here that I wondered what piece of ill-fate took me to Chief Nanga in the first place. CHAPTER EIGHT It was only after Max had left for Court at around nine that I finally felt the full weight of the previous night's humiliation settling down on me. The heat and anger had now largely evaporated leaving the cold fact that another man had wrenched my girl-friend from my hand and led her to bed under my very eyes, and I had done nothing about it---could do nothing. And why? Because the man was a minister bloated by the flatulence of ill-gotten wealth, living in a big mansion built with public money, riding in a Cadillac and watched over by a one-eyed, hired thug. And as though that were not enough he had had the obscene effrontery to say he thought I was too tired! A man of fifty or more with a son in a secondary school and a wife whose dress gets caught between the buttocks thought I was too tired! And here was I doing nothing about it except speculating whether Elsie would go back to her hospital that day or spend another night with Chief Nanga. By late afternoon I even had the crazy, preposterous idea of wanting to go to a public telephone to put through an anonymous call. Of course I killed the disgraceful thought right away. But I suppose it was possible (judging by the way things finally worked themselves out) that these weak and trivial thoughts might have been a sort of smoke screen behind which, unknown to me, weighty decisions were taking shape. It was perhaps like the theory of writing examinations that one of my lecturers used to propound to us. He said the right technique was to read all the questions once through, select those you wanted to answer and then start with the easiest; his theory being that while you were answering the easy number your subconscious would set to work arranging the others for you. I tried it out for my degree examination and although the result was not exactly startling I suppose it could have been worse. But on the present question of Chief Nanga my subconscious (or something very much like it) seemed to have gone voluntarily into operation. I was just flapping about like a trapped bird when suddenly I saw the opening. I saw that Elsie did not matter in the least. What mattered was that a man had treated me as no man had a right to treat another---not even if he was master and the other slave; and my manhood required that I make him pay for his insult in full measure. In flesh and blood terms I realized that I must go back, seek out Nanga's intended parlour-wife and give her the works, good and proper. All this flashed through my mind in one brief moment of blinding insight---just like that, without warning! I was singing happily when Max came home in the late afternoon. He tried to be furious with his house-boy for not giving me my share of the lunch when it was ready, but I went straight to the boy's defence and said he had offered to serve me but that I insisted on waiting, which was quite untrue. As we ate I told Max about Elsie and Chief Nanga, amending the story in several minor particulars and generally making light of it all, not only because I was anxious to play down my humiliation but even more because I no longer cared for anything except the revenge. 'If you put juju on a woman it will catch that old rotter,' said Max after I had told the story. 'I know someone who did,' I said light-heartedly, 'but the old rotter wasn't caught.' I then told him the story of the woman who didn't take off her bra, thinking it would amuse him. I was wrong. 'That's all they care for,' he said with a solemn face. 'Women, cars, landed property. But what else can you expect when intelligent people leave politics to illiterates like Chief Nanga?' The appearance of comparative peace which Max's house presented to me that morning proved quite deceptive. Or perhaps some of Chief Nanga's 'queen bee' characteristics had rubbed off on me and transformed me into an independent little nucleus of activity which I trailed with me into this new place. That first night I not only heard of a new political party about to be born but got myself enrolled as a foundation member. Max and some of his friends having watched with deepening disillusion the use to which our hard-won freedom was being put by corrupt, mediocre politicians had decided to come together and launch the Common People's Convention. There were eight young people in his room that evening. All but one were citizens of our country, mostly professional types. The only lady there was a very beautiful lawyer who, I learnt afterwards, was engaged to Max whom she had first met at the London School of Economics. There was a trade-unionist, a doctor, another lawyer, a teacher and a newspaper columnist. Max introduced me without any previous consultation as a 'trustworthy comrade who had only the other day had his girl-friend snatched from him by a minister who shall remain nameless'. Naturally I did not care for that kind of image or reputation. So I promptly intervened to point out that the woman in question was not strictly speaking my girl-friend but a casual acquaintance whom both Chief Nanga and I knew. 'So it was Chief Nanga, yes?' said the European and everyone burst out laughing. 'Who else could it be?' said one of the others. The white man was apparently from one of the Eastern Bloc countries. He did not neglect to stress to me in an aside that he was there only as a friend of Max's. He told me a lot of things quietly while the others were discussing some obscure details about the launching. I was as much interested in what he said as the way he said it. His English had an exotic quality occasionally---as when he said that it was good to see intellectuals like Max, myself and the rest coming out of their 'tower of elephant tusk' into active politics. And he often punctuated whatever he was saying with 'yes', spoken with the accent of a question. I must say that I was immediately taken with the idea of the Common People's Convention. Apart from everything else it would add a second string to my bow when I came to deal with Nanga. But right now I was anxious not to appear to Max and his friends as the easily impressed type. I suppose I wanted to erase whatever impression was left of Max's unfortunate if unintentional presentation of me as a kind of pitiable jellyfish. So I made what I intended to be a little spirited sceptical speech. 'It is very kind of you gentlemen and lady---I say gentlemen and lady advisedly because this happens to be Africa---it is very kind of you to accept me so readily. I wish to assure you all that your confidence will be fully justified. But without trying to put a cat among your pigeons I must say that I find it somewhat odd that a party calling itself the Common People's Convention should be made up of only professional men and women....' I was interrupted by many voices at once. But the rest gave way to Max. 'That is not entirely accurate, Odili. What you see here is only the vanguard, the planning stage. Once we are ready we shall draw in the worker, the farmer, the blacksmith, the carpenter...' 'And the unemployed, of course,' said the young lady with that confidence of a beautiful woman who has brains as well, which I find a little intimidating. 'And I'd like to take our friend up on a purely historical point. The great revolutions of history were started by intellectuals, not the common people. Karl Marx was not a common man; he wasn't even a Russian.' The trade-unionist applauded the speech by clapping and shouting 'Hear, hear.' The rest made different kinds of appreciative noises. 'Well, well,' I thought and gave up altogether my next idea of asking how the thing was going to be financed. 'At the same time,' said Max, acting the perfect chairman, 'I can't say that I blame Odili for making that point. He's always been a stickler for thoroughness. Do you know the name we called him at school? Diligent.' Everyone laughed. 'I should add that he was called Cool Max,' I said. 'He always played it cool.' 'And still does,' said the lady with a wink at him. 'I beg your pardon,' protested Max playfully. 'Anyhow, lady and gentlemen, or rather, gentlemen and lady, to borrow our friend's fine example...' 'Max!' protested the girl in mock outrage. 'Well, I never!' 'I think to save all difficulty---yes? we should simply say comrades---yes?' suggested the European, laughing nervously which made me think he wasn't joking like the rest of us. 'Hear! hear!' said the trade-unionist. 'Yes,' said Max coolly, 'except that as I said several times before, I don't want anybody to say we are communists. We can't afford the label. It would simply finish us. Our opponents would point at us and say, "Look at those crazy people who want to have everything in common including their wives", and that would be the end of it. That's the plain fact.' 'I don't know about that,' said the trade-unionist. 'I think our trouble in this country is that we are too nervous. We say we are neutral but as soon as we hear communist we begin de shake and piss for trouser. Excuse me,' he said to the lady and dropped the pidgin as suddenly as he had slid into it. 'The other day somebody asked me why did I go to Russia last January. I told him it was because if you look only in one direction your neck will become stiff....' We all laughed loud, especially the European. 'I know, Joe...' began Max, but Joe did not yield easily. 'No, excuse me, Max,' he said, 'I am serious. We are either independent in this country or we are not.' 'We are not,' said Max, and everyone laughed again, including Joe this time, all the heat apparently siphoned off him. I was struck by Max's cool, sure touch. He was clearly in control of the situation. And he seemed to me to have just the right mixture of faith and down-to-earth practical common sense. 'We will not win the next election,' he told me on another occasion. In itself it was a fairly obvious statement; but how many mushroom political parties had we seen spring up, prophesy a landslide victory for themselves and then shrivel up again. 'What we must do is get something going,' said Max, 'however small, and wait for the blow-up. It's bound to come. I don't know how or when but it's got to come. You simply cannot have this stagnation and corruption going on indefinitely.' 'How do you propose getting the money?' 'We will get some,' he smiled, 'enough to finance ordinary election expenses. We will leave mass bribing of the electors to P. O. P. and P. A. P. We will simply drop cats among their pigeons here and there, stand aside and watch. I am right now assembling all the documentary evidence I can find of corruption in high places. Brother, it will make you weep.' 'I am sure.' Because I had asked him jokingly as we were about to retire to bed if he still wrote poetry, Max had gone and fished out lines he wrote seven years ago to the music of a famous highlife. He wrote it during the intoxicating months of high hope soon after Independence. Now he sang it like a dirge. And, believe me, tears welled up at the back of my eyes; tears for the dead, infant hope. You may call me sentimental if you like. I have the poem, 'Dance-offering to the Earth-Mother', right here before me as I write and could quote the whole of it; but it could never convey in print the tragic feeling I had that evening as Max sang it tapping his foot to the highlife rhythm, and bringing back vividly the gaiety and high promise of seven years ago which now seemed more than seven lifetimes away! I will return home to her---many centuries have I wandered--- And I will make my offering at the feet of my lovely Mother: I will rebuild her house, the holy places they raped and plundered, And I will make it fine with black wood, bronzes and terra-cotta. I read this last verse over and over again. Poor black mother! Waiting so long for her infant son to come of age and comfort her and repay her for the years of shame and neglect. And the son she has pinned so much hope on turning out to be a Chief Nanga. 'Poor black mother!' I said out aloud. 'Yes, poor black mother,' said Max looking out of the window. After a long interval he turned round and asked if I remembered my Bible. 'Not really. Why?' 'Well, I can't get it out of my system. You know my father is an Anglican priest.... No, when you talked about poor black mother just now I remembered a passage that goes something like this: 'A voice was heard in Ramah Weeping and great lamentation Rachel weeping for her children And she would not be comforted, because they are not. 'It is a favourite of my father's who, by the way, still thinks we should never have asked the white man to go.' 'Perhaps he is right,' I said. 'Well, no. The trouble is that he hasn't got very much out of Independence, personally. There simply weren't any white posts in his profession that he could take over. There is only one bishop in the entire diocese and he is already an African.' 'You are unfair to the old man,' I said laughing. 'You should hear some of the things the old man says about me. I remember when I last went to see him with Eunice he said who knows I might get a son before him. Oh, we crack such expensive jokes.' 'You are an only son, aren't you?' 'Yes.' I felt so envious. 'You know, Odili,' he began suddenly after a longish pause, 'I don't believe in Providence and all that kind of stuff but your arrival just at this very moment is most fortunate. You see, we were planning to appoint able and dynamic organizing secretaries in each of the regions very soon. Now we've got you we don't have to worry our head about the south-east any more.' 'I'll do what I can, Max,' I said. Perhaps the most astonishing thing Max told me about the new party was that one of the junior ministers in the Government was behind it. 'What is he doing in the Government if he is so dissatisfied with it?' I asked navely. 'Why doesn't he resign?' 'Resign?' laughed Max. 'Where do you think you are---Britain or something? Don't be funny, Odili.' 'I am not being funny,' I said hotly, perhaps more hotly than was called for. I knew very well and needed no reminder that we were not in Britain or something, that when a man resigned in our country it was invariably with an eye on the main chance---as when a few years ago ten newly elected P. A. P. Members of Parliament had switched parties at the opening of the session and given the P. O. P. a comfortable majority overnight in return for ministerial appointments and---if one believed the rumours---a little cash prize each as well. All that was well known, but I would have thought it was better to start our new party clean, with a different kind of philosophy. 'I know how you feel,' said Max rather patronizingly. 'I felt like that at first. But we must face certain facts. You take a man like Nanga now on a salary of four thousand plus all the---you know. You know what his salary was as an elementary school teacher? Perhaps not more than eight pounds a month. Now do you expect a man like that to resign on a little matter of principle...?' 'Assuming, that is, that he can recognize principle when he sees it,' I added somewhat pompously. 'Well, exactly. I am not saying, mark you, that our man is like Nanga. He is a true nationalist and would not hesitate to resign if he felt it was really necessary. But as he himself points out, do we commit suicide every day we feel unhappy with the state of the world?' 'It's hardly the same thing,' I said. 'Well, I know. But having a man like him right in the Government is very essential, I can assure you. He tells me all that goes on.' 'In that sense I suppose you are right. As the saying goes it is only when you are close to a man that you can begin to smell his breath.' 'Well, exactly.' CHAPTER NINE I returned to Anata on 23rd December after Max and his fiance, Eunice, had tried in vain to make me spend Christmas in Bori. The lorry dropped me at the small roadside market called Waya which had sprung up to serve the Grammar School. Something unusual seemed to be going on in Josiah's shopand-bar. Whatever it was had drawn crowds from the rest of the market to it. You couldn't say definitely at first whether it was a good thing or a bad from the loud, excited talking, but it was soon clear from the kind of gesticulation I saw that something had gone wrong. I saw one old woman swing her hand in a gyre round her head and jerk it towards Josiah's shop, a most ominous sign. 'Teacher,' said one villager who had spotted me and was coming to shake hands. I didn't know him by name. 'Are you back already? Let me carry your box. I hope your home people are well.' We shook hands and I told him that my home people were well when I left them. Then I asked him what was going on there at the shop. 'What else could it be but Josiah,' he said, taking up my box and placing it on his head. 'I have said that what the white man's money will bring about has not shown itself yet. You know Azoge?' 'The blind beggar?' 'Yes, the blind beggar. Josiah is not touched by Azoge's ill-fortune and he is not satisfied with all the thieving he does here in the name of trade but must now make juju with Azoge's stick.' At this point he turned aside to greet another villager and they both shook their heads over the abomination. 'I don't understand,' I said when we resumed our conversation. 'Josiah called Azoge to his shop and gave him rice to eat and plenty of palm-wine. Azoge thought he had met a kind man and began to eat and drink. While he was eating and drinking Josiah took away his stick---have you ever heard such abomination?---and put a new stick like the old one in its place thinking that Azoge would not notice. But if a blind man does not know his own stick, tell me what else would he know? So when Azoge prepared to go he reached for his stick and found that a strange one was in its place, and so he began to shout....' 'I still don't understand. What does Josiah want to do with his stick?' 'How are you asking such a question, teacher? To make medicine for trade, of course.' 'That is terrible,' I said, still very much in the dark but not caring to make it known. 'What money will do in this land wears a hat; I have said it.' When we got to my house I gave him one shilling and he thanked me, gave a few more unhelpful details of the incident and went to rejoin the crowd. I would have gone there too but was tired from my long journey and in any case my mind was on other things. I meant to rest a little, have a wash and go in search of Mrs Nanga. But the noise outside was getting louder and louder and in the end I had to go out to see. Josiah had apparently barricaded himself inside his shop, from where, no doubt, he could hear the crowds outside pronouncing deadly curses on him and his trade. The blind man, Azoge, was there still, telling his story over and over again. I walked from one little group to another, listening. 'So the beast is not satisfied with all the money he takes from us and must now make a medicine to turn us into blind buyers of his wares,' said one old woman. 'May he blind his mother and his father, not me.' She circled her head with her right hand and cast the evil towards the shop. 'Some people's belly is like the earth. It is never so full that it will not take another corpse. God forbid,' said a palm-wine tapper I knew. I believe he was one of those who supplied Josiah with the wine he retailed in beer- bottles. But the most ominous thing I heard was from Timothy, a middle-aged man, who was a kind of Christian and a carpenter. 'Josiah has taken away enough for the owner to notice,' he said again and again. 'If anyone ever sees my feet in this shop again let him cut them off. Josiah has now removed enough for the owner to see him.' I thought much afterwards about that proverb, about the man taking things away until the owner at last notices. In the mouth of our people there was no greater condemnation. It was not just a simple question of a man's cup being full. A man's cup might be full and none be the wiser. But here the owner knew, and the owner, I discovered, is the will of the whole people. Within one week Josiah was ruined; no man, woman or child went near his shop. Even strangers and mammy- wagon passengers making but a brief stop at the market were promptly warned off. Before the month was out, the shop-and-bar closed for good and Josiah disappeared---for a while. But to return to the day I came back from Bori: I hired a bicycle in the evening from the repairer in the market and went to see Mrs Nanga. I had to see her before the story of my quarrel with her husband got to Anata and ruined my chances of reaching Edna, the intended 'parlour- wife'. Not that I thought Chief Nanga himself would want to transmit it although there was no knowing what he might or might not do, but there were many others in Bori who might send it on for want of better news. She was surprised to see me but I had a convincing explanation ready; sudden change of plans and that kind of thing. Her children came and shook hands. The village, I noticed, had already rubbed off a good deal of their Bori trimness and made their Corona-School English a little incongruous. 'Go and get a drink for Odili,' said Mrs Nanga to her eldest son, Eddy---the one at secondary school. He soon brought me a bottle of ice-cold beer which was just the thing after my strenuous ride. I poured the first glass down my throat in one go and then began to sip the second. As I did so I kept wondering how to broach the question of Edna without appearing too suspicious. 'When are you preparing to return to Bori?' I asked. 'The house is quite cold without you and the children.' 'Don't tell me about Bori, my brother. I want to rest a bit here... Eddy's father says I should come back at the end of next month before he goes to America but I don't know....' 'I thought you were going with him?' 'Me?' She laughed. 'Yes. Why not?' 'My brother, when those standing have not got their share you are talking about those kneeling. Have you ever heard of a woman going to America when she doesn't know ABC?' Fine, I thought, and was about to plunge in, but Mrs Nanga obliged me even more! 'When Edna comes she will go to those places,' she said. 'I am too old and too bush.' 'Who is Edna?' 'Don't you know about Edna, our new wife?' 'Oh, that girl. Nonsense. She doesn't know half as much book as you.' 'Ah, she does-o. I no go Modern School.' 'But standard six in your time was superior to Senior Cambridge today,' I said in our language, refusing to be drawn into the levity of pidgin. 'You talk as though I went to school in nineteen-kridim,' she said, somewhat hurt. 'No, no, no,' I said. 'But education has been falling every year. Last year's standard six is higher than this year's.' But she didn't seem to be all that hurt after all. Her mind appeared to be far away on other thoughts. 'I passed the entrance to a secondary school,' she said wistfully, 'but Eddy's father and his people kept at me to marry him, marry him, and then my own parents joined in; they said what did a girl want with so much education? So I foolishly agreed. I wasn't old enough to refuse. Edna is falling into the same trap. Imagine a girl straight from college not being allowed to teach even for one year and look around. Anyway what is my share in it? Let her come quick-quick to enjoy Chief Nanga's money before it runs away.' She laughed bitterly. My first reaction was to feel uncomfortable, not so much for what Mrs Nanga had said as by the presence while she said it of her fifteen-year-old son, Eddy. 'Is she coming into the house soon?' 'I don't know. What is my own there? She can come tomorrow as far as I am concerned; the house is there. And she can take over from me and stay awake at night to talk grammar; and in the morning her dress will be smelling of cigarette smoke and white people.' I couldn't help laughing. 'Why don't you want to advise her? She should take at least one year and teach and look around. She will listen to you, I'm sure; she is only a little girl, really.' 'True? She was born yesterday, eh? Let her come and suck.' She indicated her left breast. 'No, my brother, I won't spoil anybody's good fortune. When Eddy's father married me I was not half her age. As soon as her mother recovers let her come and eat Nanga's wealth... The food is cooked and the smell of the soup is around. Let nobody remember the woman who toiled and starved when there was no money...' She rubbed her eyes with a corner of her lappa and blew her nose into it. 'Where is her home? I must go and talk to her---tomorrow morning, I must.' Before I said this I considered Eddy's presence but quickly took the calculated risk that he was likely to be on his mother's side, although you couldn't see anything of it on his handsome face, even with his mother on the brink of tears. 'Go if you like,' said Mrs Nanga with feigned indifference, 'but don't tell anyone I sent you. If I am not to grow bigger let me at least remain as small as I am.' I was right about Eddy. He immediately and carefully described how to get to Edna's home---in another and fairly distant part of the village. He even suggested that the driver take me in their Vauxhall, which showed that in spite of his height he was still a mere boy. I lost my way a few times before I found Odo's house of red earth and thatched roof. He was sitting in his front room making the rope used for tying yams on to erect poles in the barn. The short pieces of fibre from which he worked lay beside him in three bundles, one of which had become loose at the girdle from depletion. The rope he had made so far was rolled up in a ball lying between his feet; he held its free end in his hand and tied new lengths of fibre to it. When I came in he was strengthening the last knot by pulling hard at it across his chest, exposing his locked teeth in the action. He was a big man with an enormous, shining stomach sitting on the rolled-up portion of his loin-cloth. His eyes were bloodshot and his hair greying. We shook hands and I took a chair facing him and backing the approaches to the house. He said 'welcome' several times more while he worked. 'I must carry the debt of a kolanut,' he said, re-tying a knot that had just come undone under his pull. 'It got finished only this morning.' 'Don't worry about kolanut,' I said, and added after a long pause: 'You do not know me, I'm sure. I am one of the teachers at the Grammar School.' 'Yes,' he said looking up. 'I knew it was a face I had seen.' We shook hands again and he said 'welcome' and apologized once more for not having kolanuts and I replied that it was not every day that people had kolanuts. 'Since the woman of the house went into hospital there hasn't been anyone to look after these things,' he said. 'I hope she will become well again soon.' 'We are looking on the Man Above.' After a suitable pause I asked about Edna. 'She is cooking the food to take to the hospital,' he replied coldly. 'I have a message for her from my friend Chief Nanga.' 'You are a friend of my in-law? Why did you not tell me so? Have you come from Bori, then?' 'Yes. I came back only yesterday.' 'True? How was he when you left him?' 'He was well.' He turned round on his seat, towards a door leading into inner rooms and raising his voice called out. Edna's voice came back from the interior of the compound, like a distant flute. 'Come and salute our guest,' hollered her father in the same loud voice. While we waited, I felt his eyes on me and so I made a special effort to look as casual as I could. I even turned round on my seat and inspected the approaches to the house and then formed my lips as though I was whistling to myself. 'Has your wife been in the hospital a long time?' I asked. 'Since three weeks. But her body has not been hers since the beginning of the rainy season.' 'God will hear our prayers,' I said. 'He holds the knife and He holds the yam.' Because of my position I could see Edna as she came into the middle room. I suppose she must have washed her face with a little water tipped into her palm; she was now wiping it, as she approached us, with a corner of her lappa, which she dropped as soon as she saw me. A big something caught in my throat and I tried without success to swallow it down. She wore a loose blouse over her lappa and an old silken head-tie. As she emerged into the front room all my composure seemed to leave me. Instead of holding out my hand still seated as befitted a man (and one older than she to boot) I sprang to my feet like some woman-fearing Englishman. She screwed up her face ever so slightly in an effort to remember me. 'I am a teacher at the Grammar School,' I said a little hoarsely. 'We met the day Chief Nanga lectured....' 'Oh yes, it is true,' she said smiling gloriously. 'You are Mr Samalu.' 'That's right,' I said, greatly flattered. 'You have a good memory on top of your beauty,' I said in English so the father would not understand. 'Thank you.' Perhaps it was the way she was dressed and the domestic responsibility she was exercising, or perhaps she had simply grown a little more since October; whatever the reason she was now a beautiful young woman and not a girl looking as though she was waiting to be taken back to her convent. 'Sit down, teacher?' said her father, a little impatiently, I thought. Then turning to his daughter he announced that I had a message from Bori. She turned her largish, round eyes to me. 'Nothing really,' I said embarrassed, 'Chief Nanga said I should come and greet you and find out about your mother.' 'You may tell him she is still in the hospital,' said Edna's father in a most unpleasant tone, 'and that her medicine costs money and that she planted neither cassava nor cocoyam this year.' 'Don't listen to him,' said Edna to me, the happiness wrenched out of her eyes. She turned on her father: 'Did he not send you something through his wife?' 'Listen to her,' said the man turning to me. 'Because she ate yesterday she won't eat today? No, my daughter. This is the time to enjoy an in-law, not when he has claimed his wife and gone away. Our people say: if you fail to take away a strong man's sword when he is on the ground, will you do it when he gets up...? No, my daughter. Leave me and my in-law. He will bring and bring and bring and I will eat until I am tired. And thanks to the Man Above he does not lack what to bring.' 'Excuse me,' said Edna in English and then explained in our language that she must go and finish her cooking and take lunch to her mother before one o'clock or the nurses would not let her in. She smiled vaguely and turned to go and I had the first opportunity of noticing that her back was as perfect as her front---which happens once in a million. I watched every step she took until she disappeared. Then I sat on alone with her greedy, avaricious father---for that was the impression I had just formed of him. We said very little. I whistled my silent tune and watched his rope lengthening as he tied one short piece of fibre after another to it. When he had produced a reasonable length he wound it on to the ball. Edna came into the middle room again and from there asked her father if he had given 'the stranger' a kolanut. 'I have none,' he said. 'If you have, bring it and we will eat.' 'I bought some yesterday, I thought I told you.' She brought the kolanut in a saucer and gave it to her father who broke the nut after a short avaricious prayer about bringing and eating, threw two lobes into his mouth one after the other, crunched them more noisily than I had ever heard anyone crunch kolanut and passed the saucer to me. I took one of the remaining two and returned the saucer to him. I sat on and on not knowing what else to do. Should I get up and go? That was hardly sensible. At least I should wait on till Edna came out again even if there was no chance of talking to her privately. Then a wonderful idea struck me. Why not offer to give her a lift on my bicycle to the hospital? It was at least two miles away and my bicycle had a good carrier at the back on which the plates of food could be tied. 'Now that I am here,' I told my busy host, 'I ought to go and see Edna's mother so that when next I write to Chief Nanga I shall have something to report.' 'Don't heed what my daughter says,' he told me, looking up from his work. 'Tell my in-law that the treatment of his wife's mother is costing me water and firewood.' 'I shall certainly say so,' I told him. No matter what I might think of him it was clear to me that he was not the kind of man to be bypassed in trying to reach his daughter. Edna was not in the least surprised by my offer; she was obviously the trusting type---which augured well. I hitched the travelling-can containing the food on to the carrier. I didn't want to ride on the rough approach to the house so I rolled the bicycle the short distance from the house to the road while Edna in a green-and-red floral dress walked beside me. Mounting the vehicle with the can on the back and Edna on the cross-bar proved a little tricky; but I am rather good with bicycles. I solved the problem by getting on the seat first and keeping the bicycle stationary with one foot resting firmly on the ground. Then Edna climbed on the bar sitting sideways; and I pushed off. The excitement of having her so close within my arms and the perfume of her hair in my nose would have proved overpowering if I'd had much time to consider it. I hadn't. The road to the hospital turned out to be quite hilly, not steep but just enough to take the wind out of one; and, with the kind of passenger I had, I didn't care to admit too readily to being tired. So I raced up all the little hillocks until my heart raged like a bonfire, which was very stupid of me. 'You are very strong,' said Edna. 'Why?' I said, or rather puffed out, in one enormous expiration, as I rounded the summit of yet another small hill. 'You are eating all the hills like yam.' 'I haven't seen any hill yet,' I replied, getting back some of my breath as I pedalled freely down the small, friendly descent that followed. These words were hardly out of my mouth when a stupid sheep and her four or five lambs rushed out of the roadside on my left. I braked sharply. Unfortunately Edna's back was resting on my left arm and prevented me applying the brake on that side effectively. So only the brake on the front wheel performed fully. The bicycle pitched forward and crashed on the road. Just before the impact Edna had cried out something like 'My father!' She was thrown farther up the road and as soon as I got up, I rushed to help her to her feet again. Then I turned to gaze at the foofoo and soup in the sandy road. I could have wept. I just stood looking at it and biting my lip. Then Edna burst into nervous laughter which completed my humiliation. I didn't want to look at her. Without taking my eyes from the food I murmured that I was very sorry. 'It was not your fault,' she said, 'it was the stupid sheep.' Then I noticed with the corner of my eyes that she was bending down. I turned then and saw where she had grazed her knee on the road. 'Oh dear!' I said, 'Edna, I am sorry.' She left her frock which she had held up a little at the knee and came to dust my shoulder where my new white shirt carried a thick patch of indelible red-earth. Then she bent down and picked up the travelling-can and began to wipe away the sand, and the spilt soup with green leaves. To my surprise she was crying and saying something like 'My mother will die of hunger today'. Actually I think her crying was probably due to hurt pride because the food lying on the road showed how poor her family was. But I may be wrong. At the time, however, I was greatly upset. 'Can she manage bread and corned beef?' I asked. 'We could buy some outside the hospital.' 'I haven't brought any money,' said Edna. 'I have some money,' I said, feeling the first breath of relief since the accident happened. 'And we could get some disinfectant for your knee. I'm terribly sorry, my dear.' CHAPTER TEN After the bicycle accident it was clearly impossible to say any of the things I had in mind to Edna. I managed, however, to get out of her that she was going to spend Christmas morning helping Mrs Nanga, and I privately decided to go there myself. At Christmas the village of Anata, like many other rural communities in our part of the country, always gains in numbers and glamour at the expense of the towns. Its sons and daughters who have gone out to work or trade in the cities usually return home with lots of money to spend. But perhaps the most pleasant gains are the many holidaying students from different secondary schools and training colleges and the very occasional university student. We call them holiday-makers and their presence has a way of immediately raising the general tone of the village, giving it an air of well-dressed sophistication. The boys I saw that morning wore Italian-type shoes and tight trousers and the girls wore lipstick and hair stretched with hot iron; I even saw one in slacks, which I thought was very bold indeed. When I arrived at Chief Nanga's house at about eleven there was no Edna. Instead a young man whose alchohol- reeking breath hit your nose as soon as you stepped over the threshold was holding forth and telling Mrs Nanga very noisily in pidgin and vernacular to give him a drink. He looked like a trader home from one of the towns. Mrs Nanga was handling him quietly but expertly. She had obviously done this kind of work before. After a year or two's affluence one learned how to handle less fortunate kinsmen. 'Bring me a beer!' the man shouted and hiccupped. 'Honourable Chief Nanga is my brother and he is what white man call V. I. P. ... Me na P. I. V.--Poor Innocent Victim.' He laughed, turning his dopey eyes in my direction. I couldn't help smiling; the wit and inventiveness of our traders is of course world famous. 'Yes, me na P. I. V.,' he repeated. 'A bottle of beer de cost only five shilling. Chief Honourable Nanga has the money---as of today. Look at the new house he is building. Four storeys! Before, if a man built two storeys the whole town would come to admire it. But today my kinsman is building four. Do I ask to share it with him when it is finished? No. I only ask for common beer, common five shilling beer.' 'Why shouldn't you share the house with him?' asked Mrs Nanga deflecting him off his course. 'Does a man exclude his brother from his house?' 'No, that is not done,' he conceded after thinking about it for a while with his head bent slightly to one side. 'It is my house; you have spoken the truth.' The house in question was the very modern four-storey structure going up beside the present building and which was to get into the news later. It was, as we were to learn, a 'dash' from the European building firm of Antonio and Sons whom Nanga had recently given the half-million- pound contract to build the National Academy of Arts and Sciences. I had spent about two hours at the house before Edna finally came in the car sent to bring her. In that time I gave out three shillings to three different groups of boys and their masked dancers. The last, its wooden mask-face a little askew and its stuffed pot-belly looking really stuffed, was held in restraint by his attendants tugging at a rope tied round his waist as adult attendants do to a real, dangerous Mask. The children sang, beat drums, gongs and cigarette cups and the Mask danced comically to the song: Sunday, bigi bele Sunday Sunday, bigi bele Sunday Akatakata done come! Everybody run away! Sunday, Alleluia! While the Mask danced here and there brandishing an outsize matchet the restraining rope round his waist came undone. One might have expected this sudden access to freedom to be followed by a wild rampage and loss of life and property. But the Mask tamely put his matchet down, helped his disciples retie the rope, picked up his weapon again and resumed his dance. When the drunken visitor had finally been persuaded to go and come back later, Mrs Nanga opened a side door that led from the front room into a porch fitted up as a reception room presumably for V. I. P. s and asked me to go in and rest there. Then she sent Edna to me with a bottle of beer and a glass on a tray. She served me silently. But she did not sit down afterwards; instead she went and leaned with her elbows on one of the windows looking outside. I began to drink the beer and wondered how on earth to begin. I suppose Chief Nanga's house was the wrong place, really. But I had better make the best of it before more visitors came, I thought; and as if to confirm the thought I heard just then the drumming of another group of boys. 'Why don't you sit, Edna?' I said with as much decisiveness as I could put into it. 'I am all right here,' she said. 'I want to see what is going on in the road.' 'Is anything going on?' I stood up and went to her window and was tempted to put an arm round her waist but decided that it might be premature. 'Oh, just people passing in their new Christmas dresses.' 'There is something I want to tell you,' I said, returning to my seat. 'Me?' she said, turning round and looking genuinely surprised. 'Yes, come and sit down.' She sat down and I took one more sip before speaking. 'I want to give you a piece of advice---as one who has seen more of the world and as a friend.' Good beginning, I thought, and took a sip at my glass. 'You will be making a big and serious mistake if you allow anyone to rush you into marriage now. You are too young to be rushed into marrying, especially marrying a polygamist....' 'Is that what Mama asked you to tell me?' she asked. 'Who is Mama? Oh, Mrs Nanga, I see. Why? Why should she ask me to tell you anything? No, Edna, it is in your own interest. Don't go and spoil your life.' 'What is your business in it?' 'None whatever. Except that I think a beautiful young girl like you deserves better than to marry an ancient polygamist.' 'You told my father he was your friend?' 'Even if he was my brother or my father... Edna, give yourself a chance. The man's son is almost your age...' 'That is the world of women,' she said resignedly. 'Rubbish! An educated girl like you saying a thing like that! Are you a Moslem or something?' She got up from her seat and went back to the window. 'He paid for me to go to the College,' she said. 'So what?' I said brusquely and immediately regretted it. I got up, went to the window and put an arm round her waist. Had my arm been a piece of hot iron she couldn't have reacted more smartly. She swung round and pushed me away in one alarmed movement. We stood thus---maybe four feet apart---looking at each other. Then her eyes fell; she turned again and went back to her window-ledge. I returned to my seat and decided to say nothing more. But the temptation to play the hurt, misunderstood champion was too great. 'I ask your pardon, Edna!' I said. 'Do not misunderstand me. You are right that all this is none of my business really. Forget everything I've said.' Hours later, or so it seemed, she replied: 'I am sorry, Odili.' And that was the first time she ever used my Christian name. I suppose I should have burst into song, but I didn't. 'Sorry for what?' I said glumly. 'Have I offended you?' she asked with round-eyed, surprised innocence that could have melted a heart of stone. It melted mine. 'How could you offend me?' I asked, not intending the slightest sarcasm. I was satisfied with the modest progress I seemed to have made. With a girl like Edna what was required was not any precipitous action but a gentle prodding at regular intervals. But while I was making these little private and deliberate decisions in my quiet little corner of Anata, great and momentous events were at last---after long preparation---ready to break and shake all of us out of our leisurely ways. As the whole world now knows, our Minister of Foreign Trade, Alhaji Chief Senator Suleiman Wagada, announced on New Year's Day a twenty per cent rise in import duties on certain types of textile goods. On January 2nd the Opposition Progressive Alliance Party published detailed evidence to show that someone had told the firm of British Amalgamated of the Minister's plans as long ago as October and that they had taken steps to bring in three shiploads of the textiles by mid-December. The Cabinet was split overnight into the savage warring camps of those who wanted the Government to resign and those, like Chief Nanga, who said that the matter concerned the Minister of Foreign Trade alone and if it came to resigning he should resign by himself. And then the filth began to flow. The Daily Matchet for instance carried a story which showed that Chief Nanga, who had himself held the portfolio of Foreign Trade until two years ago, had been guilty of the same practice and had built out of his gains three blocks of seven-storey luxury flats at three hundred thousand pounds each in the name of his wife and that these flats were immediately leased by British Amalgamated at fourteen hundred a month each. At first this and other stories were told in innuendo, but by the second week all restraint and caution were cast to the four winds. The country was on the verge of chaos. The Trade Unions and the Civil Service Union made loud noises and gave notice of nation-wide strikes. The shops closed for fear of looting. The GovernorGeneral according to rumour called on the Prime Minister to resign which he finally got round to doing three weeks later. Meanwhile I was summoned to Bori by Max for consultation and to be present at the launching of the C. P. C. We had been caught with only one foot on the ground, so to speak, but we didn't mind in the least. We were exhilarated like everyone else by the heady atmosphere of impending violence. For we all knew that the coming election was going to be a life and death fight. After seven years of lethargy any action seemed welcome and desirable; the country was ripe and impatient to shed in violent exercise the lazy folds of flabby skin and fat it had put on in the greedy years of indolence. The scandals that were daily exposed in the newspapers---far from causing general depression in the country--produced a feeling akin to festivity; I don't mean for people like Chief the Honourable M.A. Nanga, M.P., or Alhaji Chief Senator Suleiman Wagada, but for the rest of us who thought we had nothing to lose. I returned to Anata with a brand-new Volkswagen, eight hundred pounds in currency notes and assurances that more would be forthcoming. I would have driven straight to see Edna but the shining cream-coloured car was covered in a thick coat of red dust and splattered with brown mud from the long journey, so I decided to go home and have it washed first. Then I drove in style to her place only to be told she had gone to see her grandmother in another village. Her father came out to look at the car, and from the way he did so, you would think he knew a lot about cars. After a very long and thorough inspection he pronounced it a tortoise and chuckled to himself. That visit turned out also to be our last friendly encounter, but I must not anticipate later developments. That was also the day I got home, sat down and composed a very long letter, my first to Edna---giving her all the reasons why she must not marry Chief Nanga. When I first announced that I was going to contest Chief Nanga's seat everybody laughed--everyone except the wicked outlawed trader, Josiah. He came to me one night out of nowhere and said he would like to join my campaign. I was naturally touched but at the same time knew that having a man with his reputation in our party would be an enormous embarrassment, a sure way to kill the whole thing. So I told him as gently as I could that I had no position to offer him. He stood silent for a while and then told me that I would regret my decision and disappeared again into the night before I had time to tell him to go to hell. Chief Nanga's constituency (number 136 in the Constituency Register) was made up of five villages including my own home village Urua, and his home-base Anata. I had thought of carrying the battle right to his doorstep by making Anata my headquarters but I soon changed my mind. The inaugural meeting I arranged in the Assembly Hall of the school was completely disrupted at the very last moment by Mr Nwege the Proprietor. A few villagers had come to hear me, or so I thought, and naturally I was furious to find the hall barred. One of the villagers who seemed particularly incensed by the treatment I had received came forward to introduce himself, or so it seemed to me. 'So you are Mr Samalu?' he said. 'Pleased to meet you.' There was a lot of fellow feeling on his face. I stretched my hand to take his. But instead of a handshake he smartly described an arc at my head and knocked off my red cap. The small crowd thought it was very funny and laughed boisterously. I decided to remain cool and dignified; I bent down to pick up my cap and to my greatest shock and mortification the rascal kicked me behind---not violently but enough to make me land on my two hands, to avoid landing on my head. I was ready for a fight then but the cowardly fellow had taken to his heels--to the applause of most of the people around, the very people I had assumed came to hear me. I decided there and then that I was in hostile territory and must recruit a bodyguard and move to my own village. But Anata had not finished with me yet. That night Mr Nwege sent a boy to call me. When I got to his 'Lodge' he handed me a month's salary and a notice of dismissal. I was about to thank him for so obligingly setting fire to a house that was due for demolition and saving someone's labour, when he snarled: 'I see that you have grown too big for your coat.' My thanks died in my throat. 'You have grown too small in yours, Mr Push-me-down,' I said instead, laughing boisterously in his amazed face. It was an enormous release for me after all the pent-up annoyance of that afternoon. 'Yes, Mr Push-me-down, you have shrivelled up in your coat.' He sprang up from his seat and I thought (or hoped) he was coming to assault me. But no; rather he rushed into an inner room probably to get his double-barrelled gun or something. I didn't wait to find out. It was now four days since I had returned from Bori and I had not seen Mrs Nanga yet, nor Edna for that matter. And that was going to be my last working day---so to speak---before I moved my headquarters to Urua. Frankly I had no more business to do with Mrs Nanga. But a sort of conspiratorial friendship had sprung up between us and I would have felt very bad not to have said good-bye to her. There was also a dash of plain curiosity in it; I wanted to know how she was taking the news that I was contesting her husband's seat. At that point I was still nave enough in my political thinking to have that kind of curiosity. But perhaps my strongest reason for going was the odd chance of seeing Edna there. The front door was open and I walked in clapping my hands. 'Who?' asked Mrs Nanga from somewhere inside. 'Me,' I said at the top of my voice. 'There is a seat,' she called out. I sat down facing the approaches to the house. Soon I heard her coming, her slippers clapping against the soles of her feet; and she was humming a tune. I turned my head and our faces met. She stopped dead at the doorway. 'Good morning, Mrs Nanga,' I said. 'What do you want here?' Her Adam's apple was agitated by a hard swallowing. 'I only come to say good-bye,' I said, getting up. 'I do not need your good-bye, do you hear me? And you may thank your personal spirit that there is no strong man in the house. That is why you can sneak here in the noonday....' 'Pardon me---' I began, but was not allowed to finish. Mrs Nanga had suddenly and dramatically raised her voice so the entire village could hear and was calling on all the gods of her people to come and witness that she was sitting in her house, as a weak person was wont to sit when her tormentor, to show how strong he was, brought a fight to her very doorstep.... I heard most of this recitative on my way to the car. I had begun the retreat as soon as she had removed her head-tie and girdled her waist firmly with it pulling the two ends as I had seen Edna's father pull his rope. As it was nearly midday I drove from Mrs Nanga's house to the Anata Mission Hospital to waylay Edna. After more than an hour in my car I did what I should have done in the first place. I decided to go to the Women's ward. But the gateman refused to let my car through. I didn't mind that but I certainly minded his rudeness---and told him so. All he had to do was tell me politely that cars were not allowed in the hospital unless they were carrying a patient. Instead he shouted at me like a mad dog and said, pointing at the notice: 'Abi you no fit read notice?' 'Don't be silly,' I said, 'and don't shout at me!' 'Be silly!' he shouted. 'Idiot like you. Look him motor self. When they call those wey get motor you go follow them comot? Foolish idiot.' I parked my car outside the gate and went in, deciding to ignore the man who had not ceased shouting. 'Na him make accident de kill them for road every day. Nonsense!' As I approached the wards the man's shrill voice rang in my ear pronouncing one evil wish after another. I reflected on the depth of resentment and hatred from which such venom came---and for no other reason than that I owned a car, or seemed to own one! It was depressing and quite frightening. And when I got to the ward and was told with pointless brusqueness by a girl-nurse that my patient had been discharged yesterday I felt really downcast. As a rule I don't like suffering to no purpose. Suffering should be creative, should give birth to something good and lovely. So I drove from the hospital to Edna's place, although her father had told me three days earlier never to set foot in his house again. And for the first time since my return from Bori my luck was on. Edna was in and her father was out. But apparently he had only gone behind the compound---presumably to ease himself. Edna pleaded with me to go. 'No,' I said. 'He will kill you if he finds you here.' 'That would be wonderful,' I said in English. 'I will come to your place to see you if you go now.' 'You can't because I leave Anata tomorrow morning. I have been dismissed from the school. How is your mother? I've just been to the hospital to see her.' Edna's eyes darted from me to the door of the middle room, from which I imagined her father would appear, and darted back again. She was literally shaking with fear. Somehow I was enjoying her terror. It was as though I was drunk---with what I couldn't say. 'Please, Odili,' she said again, with tears in her voice. 'Say "please, Odili" one hundred times and I shall go,' I said, throwing my limbs in all directions for relaxation. 'Oh, you think it is a laughing matter. All right, sit there.' She sat down on the other hard chair and folded her arms under her perfectly formed breasts. 'Please, Odili,' she said, getting up again quickly and wringing her hands. 'One!' 'What is all this?' she said in despair. 'Minus one.' At that moment her father cleared his throat inside the compound. She grabbed my arm and tried to pull me up. I laughed at her puny effort and settled back. Her father had now come into the house and we could hear his footsteps. 'You see now.... What is all this?' He took a little time to focus his eyes properly and decide who I was. When he had decided he took a few more steps until he stood threateningly over me. 'Who do you want here?' he asked with menacing quietness. 'Were you not the one I told the other day never to come here again?' 'Yes,' I said, not even bothering to get up. 'Wait for me,' he said, and rushed back the way he had come. Lately I had seen too many people rushing around threateningly, so that I decided to sit through this one. I wasn't even touched by Edna's weeping. She turned and ran, calling 'Mother! Mother!' But at the door she met her father who shoved her aside and came at me with a raised matchet. I said: 'Who do you want here?' Edna increased her crying which finally brought her sick mother unsteadily to the doorway. Meanwhile I was explaining to my assailant that I came to persuade him and his family to cast their paper for me on voting day. 'Do you think the boy's head is correct?' he asked of no one in particular, and I saw his matchet gradually descend to his side. By the time Edna's mother appeared the worst of the danger seemed over. 'That is the boy who brought me bread, is it not?' she asked as she tottered towards me holding out a shrunken, varicose hand. 'I don't care what he brought you,' said her husband. 'What I know is that he is poking his finger into my in- law's eyes.' 'How?' asked the woman, and her husband explained. She listened carefully, thought about it and then said: 'What is my share in that? They are both white man's people. And they know what is what between themselves. What do we know?' Before I left the place an hour or so later, Edna's father had given me a sound piece of advice--at least sound in his own eyes. 'My in-law is like a bull,' he said, 'and your challenge is like the challenge of a tick to a bull. The tick fills its belly with blood from the back of the bull and the bull doesn't even know it's there. He carries it wherever he goes---to eat, drink or pass ordure. Then one day the cattle egret comes, perches on the bull's back and picks out the tick....' 'Thank you very much for your advice,' I said. 'I hear that they have given you much money to use in fighting my in-law,' he continued. 'If you have sense in your belly you will carry the money into your bed-chamber and stow it away and do something useful with it. It is your own good luck. But if you prefer to throw it away why not ask me to help you?' It was amazing how quickly all kinds of rumour about my plans had spread. It usually took a telegram five days to get to this village from Bori---that is, provided the Post and Telegraph boys were not on strike, and a storm had not felled tree branches across telegraph wires anywhere along the three-hundred-mile route. But a rumour could generally make it in one day or less. When I rose to go, Edna, who had kept very much in the background during the last hour, rose to see me off to the car. 'Where are you going?' asked her father. 'To see him off.' 'To see whom off? Don't let me lay hands on you this afternoon.' 'Bye, bye,' she said from the doorway. 'Bye,' I said, trying to smile. CHAPTER ELEVEN As I drove away thinking of the courage and indifference to personal danger I had just shown, I felt a tingling glow of satisfaction spread all over me as palm-oil does on hot yam. Also the way Edna had looked at me when she said 'bye, bye' showed plainly that my fearlessness had not been lost on her either. And at that very moment I was suddenly confronted by a fact I had been dodging for some time. I knew then that I wanted Edna now (if not all along) for her own sake first and foremost and only very remotely as part of a general scheme of revenge. I had started off telling myself that I was going for her in order to hurt Chief Nanga; now I would gladly chop off Chief Nanga's head so as to get her. Funny, wasn't it? Having got that far in my self-analysis I had to ask myself one question. How important was my political activity in its own right? It was difficult to say; things seemed so mixed up; my revenge, my new political ambition and the girl. And perhaps it was just as well that my motives should entangle and reinforce one another. For I was not being so nave as to imagine that loving Edna was enough to wrench her from a minister. True, I had other advantages like youth and education but those were nothing beside wealth and position and the authority of a greedy father. No. I needed all the reinforcement I could get. Although I had little hope of winning Chief Nanga's seat, it was necessary nonetheless to fight and expose him as much as possible so that, even if he won, the Prime Minister would find it impossible to re-appoint him to his Cabinet. In fact there was already enough filth clinging to his name to disqualify him---and most of his colleagues as well---but we are not as strict as some countries. That is why C. P. C. publicity had to ferret out every scandal and blow it up, and maybe someone would get up and say: 'No, Nanga has taken more than the owner could ignore!' But it was no more than a hope. As I drove down the very same incline on which Edna and I had so dramatically come to grief over a black sheep and its lambs only a few weeks earlier, I could not help thinking also of the quick transformations that were such a feature of our country, and in particular of the changes of attitude in my own self. I had gone to the University with the clear intention of coming out again after three years as a full member of the privileged class whose symbol was the car. So much did I think of it in fact that, as early as my second year, I had gone and taken out a driver's licence and even made a mental note of the make of car I would buy. (It had a gadget which turned the seats into a bed in a matter of seconds.) But in my final year I had passed through what I might call a period of intellectual crisis brought on partly by my radical Irish lecturer in history and partly by someone who five years earlier had been by all accounts a fire-eating president of our Students' Union. He was now an ice-cream-eating Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Labour and Production and had not only become one of the wealthiest and most corrupt landlords in Bori but was reported in the Press as saying that trade- union leaders should be put in detention. He became for us a classic example of the corroding effect of privilege. We burnt his effigy on the floor of the Union Building from which he had made fine speeches against the Government, and were fined by the University authorities for blacking the ceiling. Many of us vowed then never to be corrupted by bourgeois privileges of which the car was the most visible symbol in our country. And now here was I in this marvellous little affair eating the hills like yam---as Edna would have said. I hoped I was safe; for a man who avoids danger for years and then gets killed in the end has wasted his care. As soon as I got home, my boy Peter handed me a blue envelope. The writing was beautifully rounded; without doubt a woman's hand. It wasn't Joy's (Joy was a casual friend teaching in a near-by school); I hoped with a pounding heart that it was from Edna. But it couldn't be, she would have said something about it when I saw her an hour or so ago. 'A boy brought it on a bicycle. Soon after you left in the morning,' said Peter. 'All right,' I said. 'Go away.' I tried to open it fast and then held back for fear of what it might contain. Also I didn't want to destroy the beautiful envelope. It was Edna! Why hadn't she mentioned it? Dear Odili, Your missive of 10th instant was received and its contents well noted. I cannot adequately express my deep sense of gratitude for your brotherly pieces of advice. It is just a pity that you did not meet me in the house when you came last time. My brother has narrated to me how my father addressed you badly and disgraced you. I am really sorry about the whole episode and I feel like going on a bended knee to beg forgiveness. I know that you are so noble and kind-hearted to forgive me before even I ask [smiles!]. I have noted carefully all what you said about my marriage. Really, you should pity poor me, Odili. I am in a jam about the whole thing. If I develop cold feet now my father will almost kill me. Where is he going to find all the money the man has paid on my head? So it is not so much that I want to be called a minister's wife but a matter of can't help. What cannot be avoided must be borne.' What I pray for is happiness. If God says that I will be happy in any man's house I will be happy. I hope we will always be friends. For yesterday is but a dream and tomorrow is only a vision but today's friendship makes every yesterday a dream of happiness and every tomorrow a vision of hope. Good-bye and sweet dreams. Yours v. truly, Edna Odo P. S. My brother told me you have bought a new car. Congrats and more grease to your elbows. I hope you will carry me in it one day in remembrance of the bicycle accident [smiles!]. Edna. It was dated yesterday. She must have been expecting me to mention it, or perhaps she was too concerned about my safety. I read it again standing up, then sitting down and finally lying on the bed, flat on my back. Some of it was Edna and some (like the bit about visions of tomorrow) clearly was not; it must have come straight from one of these so-called 'Letter Writers'. I remember one---The Complete Loveletter Writer--which was very popular with us in my school days. It was written, printed and published by an adventurous trader in Kataki and claimed on its front cover to have sold 500,000 copies, which I believe was merely a way of saying that it had sold a few hundred copies or hoped to do so. I know some foreigners think we are funny with figures. One day when I was still at the University, an old District Officer with whom my father had worked long ago came to our house; he had just come back to our area as adviser on co-operatives after years of retirement and was paying a call on his old interpreter. As they talked in the parlour my younger half-brothers and sisters kept up an endless procession in front of the strange visitor until he was constrained to ask my father how many children he had. 'About fifteen,' said my father. 'About? Surely you must know.' My father grinned and talked about other things. Of course he knew how many children he had but people don't go counting their children as they do animals or yams. And the same I fear goes for our country's population. But to return to Edna's letter. Having mentally removed those parts of it which were not her sweet spontaneous self I began to analyse the rest word by word to try and discover how I stood in her estimation. First of all 'Dear Odili' was somewhat disappointing; I had written 'My dearest Edna' in my own letter and if interest was mutual the correct way would be for the woman to reply in the same degree of fondness or perhaps one grade lower---which in this case would be 'My dear Odili'. Anyway there were small compensations dotted here and there in the main body of the letter and I was prepared to place considerable weight on 'sweet dreams'. Altogether I felt a little encouraged to launch my offensive against Chief Nanga. As soon as I returned to my own village I set about organizing my bodyguard. There were four of them, and their leader was a tough called Boniface who had arrived in our village a few years before from no one knew where. He didn't even speak our language at the time. He does now, but still prefers pidgin. I don't know whether it is true that he had a single bone in his forearm instead of the normal two but that was the story. He sometimes behaved like a crazy man which he himself admitted openly, saying it had arisen from a boyhood accident in which he fell down a mango tree and landed on his head. I paid him ten pounds a month and gave him food, which was quite generous; his three assistants earned much less. Wherever I went in my campaigning, Boniface sat with me in front and the other three at the back of the car. As our journeys became more and more hazardous I agreed to our carrying the minimum of weapons strictly for defence. We had five matchets, a few empty bottles and stones in the boot. Later we were compelled to add two double-barrelled guns. I only agreed to this most reluctantly after many acts of violence were staged against us, like the unprovoked attack by some hoodlums and thugs calling themselves Nanga's Youth Vanguard or Nangavanga, for short. New branches of this Nangavanga were springing up every day throughout the district. Their declared aim was to 'annihilate all enemies of progress' and 'to project true Nangaism'. The fellows we ran into carried placards, one of which read: NANGAISM FOREVER: SAMALU IS TREITOR. It was the first time I had seen myself on a placard and I felt oddly elated. It was also amusing, really, how the cowards slunk away from the road-blocks they had put up when Boniface reached out and grabbed two of their leaders, brought their heads together like dumb-bells and left them to fall to either side of him. You should have seen them fall like cut banana trunks. It was then I acquired my first trophy---the placard with my name on it. But I lost my windscreen which they smashed with stones. It was funny but from then on I began to look out for unfriendly placards carrying my name and to feel somewhat disappointed if I didn't see them or saw too few. One early morning Boniface and one of the other stalwarts woke me up and demanded twentyfive pounds. I knew that a certain amount of exploitation was inevitable in this business and I wasn't going to question how every penny was spent. But at the same time I didn't see how I could abdicate my responsibility for C. P. C. funds entrusted to me. I had to satisfy my conscience that I was exercising adequate control. 'I gave you ten pounds only yesterday,' I said and was about to add that unlike our opponents we had very limited funds---a point which I had already made many times. But Boniface interrupted me. 'Are you there?' he said. 'If na play we de play make you tell us because me I no wan waste my time for nothing sake. Or you think say na so so talk talk you go take win Chief Nanga. If Government no give you plenty money for election make you go tell them no be sand sand we de take do am....' 'Man no fit fight tiger with empty hand,' added his companion before I could put in a word to correct Boniface's fantastic misconception. 'No be Government de give us money,' I said. 'We na small party, C. P. C. We wan help poor people like you. How Government go give us money...?' 'But na who de give the er weting call... P. C. P. money?' asked Boniface puzzled. 'Some friends abroad,' I said with a knowing air to cover my own ignorance which I had forgotten to worry about in the heat of activity. 'You no fit send your friends telegram?' asked Boniface's companion. 'Let's not go into that now. What do you need twenty- five pounds for? And what have you done with the ten pounds?' I felt I had to sound firm. It worked. 'We give three pound ten to that policeman so that he go spoil the paper for our case. Then we give one-ten to Court Clerk because they say as the matter done reach him eye the policeman no kuku spoil am just like that. Then we give another two pound...' 'All right,' I said. 'What do you want the twenty-five pounds for?' 'They no tell you say Chief Nanga done return back from Bori yesterday?' 'So you wan give am money too?' I asked. 'This no be matter for joke; we wan the money to pay certain porsons wey go go him house for night and burn him car.' 'What! No, we don't need to do that.' There was a minute's silence. 'Look my frien I done tell you say if you no wan serious for this business make you go rest for house. I done see say you want play too much gentleman for this matter... Dem tell you say na gentlemanity de give other people minister...? Anyway wetin be my concern there? Na you sabi.' My father's attitude to my political activity intrigued me a lot. He was, as I think I have already indicated, the local chairman of P. O. P. in our village, Urua, and so I expected that his house would not contain both of us. But I was quite wrong. He took the view (without expressing it in so many words) that the mainspring of political action was personal gain, a view which, I might say, was much more in line with the general feeling in the country than the high-minded thinking of fellows like Max and I. The only comment I remember my father making (at the beginning anyway) was when he asked if my 'new' party was ready to give me enough money to fight Nanga. He sounded a little doubtful. But he was clearly satisfied with what I had got out of it so far, especially the car which he was now using nearly as much as myself. The normal hostility between us was put away in a corner, out of sight. But very soon all that was to change, and then change again. We were sitting in his outhouse one day about noon reading yesterday's newspapers which I had just bought from the local newsagent and hairdresser, Jolly Barber, when I saw Chief Nanga's Cadillac approaching. I thought of going into the main house but decided against it. After all, he was walking into my own lair and if anyone was to feel flustered it shouldn't be me but the intruder. I told my father who was peering helplessly at the car that it was Chief Nanga and he immediately reached for a singlet to cover the upper part of his body, re-tied his enormous lappa nervously and went to the doorstep to receive the visitor wearing a flabby, ingratiating smile---the type our people describe so aptly as putrid. I sat where I was, pretending to read. 'Hello! Odili, my great enemy,' greeted Chief Nanga in the most daring assault of counterfeit affability I had ever seen or thought possible. 'Hello,' I said as flat as the floor. 'Did you see Chief the Honourable Minister yesterday?' asked my father severely. 'Let him be, sir,' said Chief Nanga. 'He and I like to say harsh things to each other in jest. Those who don't know us may think we are about to cut off one another's heads...' I settled farther back in my cane chair and raised the newspaper higher. He tried a few more times to draw me out but I stoutly refused to open my mouth, even when my father foolishly shouted at me and drew near as though to strike me. Fortunately for both of us he didn't do it; for me it would have spelt immediate disaster; a man who hit his father wouldn't have had much of a hearing thereafter in my constituency. It was interesting to me---thinking about it later---how Chief Nanga who had been so loudly interceding for me (or appearing to do so) suddenly withdrew into expectant silence, praying no doubt that my father's rage would push him over the brink. When he realized that his prayer would not be answered after all he said, without the slightest hint of falseness, 'Don't worry about Odili, sir. If a young man does not behave like a young man who is going to?' 'He should wait till he builds his own house then he may put his head into a pot there---not here in my house. If he has no respect for me why should he carry his foolishness to such an important guest...?' 'Never mind, sir. I am no guest here. I regard here as my house and yourself as my political father. Whatever we achieve over there in Bori is because we have the backing of people like you at home. All these young boys who are saying all kinds of rubbish against me, what do they know? They hear that Chief Nanga has eaten ten per cent commission and they begin to break their heads and holler up and down. They don't know that all the commissions are paid into party funds....' I had lowered my newspaper to half-mast, so to speak. 'That's right,' said my father knowingly, but I could tell by watching his face that his final state of knowledge was achieved through an effort of will. At first he had seemed puzzled by Nanga's explanation and then I suppose he felt that as a local chairman of P. O. P. he could not admit to ignorance of its affairs so he immediately knew. As in breaking the law, what one knows and what one ought to know come to the same thing. 'I suppose your new four-storeyed building is going to be the party headquarters,' I asked, putting down the newspaper altogether. 'Chief the Honourable Minister was not talking to you,' said my father lamely. 'Naturally he wouldn't because he knows I know what he knows... The buses, for instance, we all know are for carrying the party, and the import duty...' 'Shut up!' shouted my father. 'Leave him alone, sir. When he finishes advertising his ignorance I will educate him.' I wanted to say he should go and educate his mother but decided against it. 'Have you finished, Mr Nationalist? He that knows not and knows not that he knows not is a fool.' 'Don't mind him, Chief. He is my son but I can tell you that if I had another like him I would have died long ago. Let us go into the house.' My father led the way to the dark parlour of the main house---a stone and cement building which was once the best and most modern house in Urua. But today nobody remembers it when buildings are talked about. It has become old-fashioned with its high, steep roof into which had gone enough corrugated iron sheets for at least two other houses. Some day someone will have to replace the wooden jalousie of its narrow windows with glass panes so as to let in more light into the rooms. And most likely the someone will be me. I stayed on in the outhouse exulting in my successful onslaught which had driven my father and his important guest from this airy comfortable day-room into the dark stone house. About half an hour later my father came to the front door of the main house and called my name. 'Sir!' I answered full of respect but without getting up or stirring in any way. 'Come in here,' he said. I took my time to get up and walk over. A bottle of whisky and another of soda stood on a tray on the small round table in the middle of the room. Chief Nanga's glass was half full; my father's empty, as usual. 'Sit down,' he said to me; 'we don't eat people.' The joviality in his tone and manner put me on guard right away. I sat down ostentatiously ignoring to look in Nanga's direction. My father didn't waste his words. 'When a mad man walks naked it is his kinsmen who feel shame not himself. So I have been begging Chief Nanga for forgiveness, on your behalf. How could you go to his house asking for his help and eating his food and then spitting in his face?... Let me finish. You did not tell me any of these things--that you abused him in public and left his house to plot his downfall.... I said let me finish! It does not surprise me that you slunk back and said nothing about it to me. Not that you ever say anything to me. Why should you? Do I know book? Am I not of the Old Testament?... Let me finish. In spite of your behaviour Chief Nanga has continued to struggle for you and has now brought you the scholarship to your house. His kindness surprises me; I couldn't do it myself. On top of that he has brought you two hundred and fifty pounds if you will sign this paper....' He held up a piece of paper. 'Don't say I am interrupting you, sir,' said Chief Nanga. 'I don't want Odili to misunderstand me.' He turned squarely to me. 'I am not afraid of you. Every goat and every fowl in this country knows that you will fail woefully. You will lose your deposit and disgrace yourself. I am only giving you this money because I feel that after all my years of service to my people I deserve to be elected unopposed so that my detractors in Bori will know that I have my people solidly behind me. 'That is the only reason I am giving you this money. Otherwise I should leave you alone to learn your bitter lesson so that when you hear of election again you will run.... I know those irresponsible boys have given you money. If you have any sense keep the money and train your father's children with it or do something useful....' I stayed miraculously unruffled. Actually I was thinking about Edna all along. But I noticed also how my father had raised his nose in the air in proud rejection of the offer I hadn't made---nor intended to make---to train his children. 'We know where that money is coming from,' continued Nanga. 'Don't think we don't know. We will deal with them after the election. They think they can come here and give money to irresponsible people to overthrow a duly constituted government. We will show them. As for you my brother you can eat what has entered your hand.... Your good friend Maxwell Kulamo has more sense than you. He has already taken his money and agreed to step down for Chief Koko.' 'Impossible!' 'Look at him. He doesn't even know what is happening; our great politician! You stay in the bush here wasting your time and your friends are busy putting their money in the bank in Bori. Anyway you are not a small boy. I have done my best and, God so good, your father is my living witness. Take your money and take your scholarship to go and learn more book; the country needs experts like you. And leave the dirty game of politics to us who know how to play it...' 'Do you want an answer? It is NO in capital letters! You think everyone can be bought with a few dirty pounds. You're making a sad mistake. I will fight you along the road and in the bush, even if you buy the entire C. P. C. I can see you are trying to cover your fear. I see the fear in your eyes. If you know you are not afraid why do you send thugs to molest me; why do your hired cowards carry placards with my name. I am sorry, Mr Man, you can take your filthy money away and clear out of here... Bush man!' 'Odili!' It was I who had to clear out there and then. As I passed by the Cadillac I noticed four or five thugs in it, one of whom looked familiar although I did not get close enough to see them well. I knew it was a lie about Max agreeing to step down but I began to wonder why he hadn't arrived yet to mount our campaign in my constituency. CHAPTER TWELVE A mad man may sometimes speak a true word,' said my father, 'but, you watch him, he will soon add something to it that will tell you his mind is still spoilt. My son, you have again shown your true self. When you came home with a car I thought to myself: good, some sense is entering his belly at last... But I should have known. So you really want to fight Chief Nanga! My son, why don't you fall where your pieces could be gathered? If the money he was offering was too small why did you not say so? Why did you not ask for three or four hundred? But then your name would not be Odili if you did that. No, you have to insult the man who came to you as a friend and---let me ask you something: Do you think he will return tomorrow to beg you again with two-fifty pounds? No, my son. You have lost the sky and you have lost the ground....' 'Why do you worry yourself and get lean over a loss that is mine and not yours at all? You are in P. O. P. and I am in C. P. C....' 'You have to listen to my irritating voice until the day comes when you stop answering Odili Samalu or else until you look for me and don't see me any more.' This softened me a lot. I am always sentimental when it comes to people not being seen when they are looked for. I said nothing immediately but when I did it was in a more conciliatory tone. 'So your party gives ministers authority to take bribes, eh?' 'What?' he said, waking up. I hadn't been looking at him and so didn't notice when he had dropped off. 'Chief Nanga said that the ten per cent he receives on contracts is for your party. Is that true?' 'If Alligator comes out of the water one morning and tells you that Crocodile is sick can you doubt his story?' 'I see.' This time I watched him drop off almost immediately and smiled in spite of myself. The next day Max and our campaign team arrived from Bori. There were a dozen other people with him, only two of whom I knew already---Eunice his fiance and the trade- unionist, Joe. They had a car, a minibus and two brand-new Land-Rovers with loudspeakers fitted on the roof. Seeing them so confident and so well-equipped was for me the most morale-boosting event of the past so many weeks. I envied Max his beautiful, dedicated girl; some people are simply lucky. I wish I could bring Edna there to see them. 'You didn't tell me you were coming today,' I said to Max; 'not that it matters.' 'Didn't you get my telegram?' 'No.' 'I sent you a telegram on Monday.' 'Monday of this week? Oh well, today is only Thursday; it should get here on Saturday...' 'D. V.,' said Max. Everyone laughed as I led them to my father's outhouse. He had on seeing them quickly put on his browning singlet and was now shaking hands with everyone with as much enthusiasm as if he had been our patron. My young brothers and sisters were all over the place, some making faces at their image on the shining car bodies. The cars must have been washed at the ferry, I thought. It was typical of Max to want to come in clean and spotless. Two or three of my father's wives came to the door of the inner compound and called out greetings to the visitors. Then Mama, the senior wife, came out hurriedly clutching a telegram. 'It came this morning while you were out; I just remembered it,' she said to me. 'I told Edmund to remind me as soon as you returned, but the foolish boy...' Everyone laughed again and my father catching the hilarity terminated the rebuke he had begun to deliver to 'those who can't read but love to handle other people's letters...' 'We must withdraw our earlier statements,' said Max, 'and give three hearty cheers to the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs. 'Hip, hip-hip---' 'Hurrah!' 'HIP, HIP, HIP---' 'Hurrah!' 'For they are jolly good fellows For they are jolly good fellows For they are jolly good fellows And so say all of us. And so say all of us, hurrah! And so say all of us, hurrah! For they are jolly good fellows For they are jolly good fellows For they are jolly good fellows And so say all of us.' The singing and the laughter and the sight of so many cars brought in neighbours and passers-by until we had a small crowd. 'Why don't we launch our campaign here and now?' asked Max with glazed intoxicated-looking eyes. 'Why not indeed?' said Eunice. 'Not here,' I said firmly. 'My father is local chairman of P. O. P. and we shouldn't embarrass him... In any case people don't launch campaigns just like that on the spur of the moment.' 'What is the boy talking?' asked my father. 'What has my being in P. O. P. got to do with it? I believe that the hawk should perch and the eagle perch, whichever says to the other don't, may its own wing break.' My comrades applauded him and sang 'For he is a jolly good fellow' again. This time the loudspeakers had been switched on and the entire neighbourhood rang with song. By the time four or five highlife records had been played as well, the compound became too small for our audience. Every chair and kitchen-stool in the house was brought out and arranged in a half-moon for the elders and village dignitaries. A microphone was set up on the steps of the outhouse facing the crowd. What impressed them right away was how you could talk into that ball and get the voice thundering in a completely different place. 'Say what you will,' I heard someone remark, 'the white man is a spirit.' Max's unprepared speech---or perhaps it was prepared in its broad outlines---was on the whole impressive. But I do not think that it persuaded many people. Actually it wasn't a speech in the strict sense but a dialogue between him and the audience, or a vociferous fraction of the audience. There was one man who proved particularly troublesome. He had been a police corporal who had served two years in jail for corruptly receiving ten shillings from a lorry driver. That was the official version anyway. The man's own story was that he had been framed because he had stood up against his white boss in preIndependence days. I believe there was a third version which put the blame on enemies from another tribe. Whatever the true story, on his release, 'Couple', as the villagers still called him, had come back to his people and become a local councillor and politician. He was at the moment very much involved in supplying stones for our village pipe-borne water scheme and was widely accused (in whispers) of selling one heap of stones in the morning, carrying it away at night and selling it again the next day; and repeating the cycle as long as he liked. He was of course in league with the Local Council Treasurer. Max began by accusing the outgoing Government of all kinds of swindling and corruption. As he gave instance after instance of how some of our leaders who were ash- mouthed paupers five years ago had become near-millionaires under our very eyes, many in the audience laughed. But it was the laughter of resignation to misfortune. No one among them swore vengeance; no one shook with rage or showed any sign of fight. They understood what was being said, they had seen it with their own eyes. But what did anyone expect them to do? The ex-policeman put it very well. 'We know they are eating,' he said, 'but we are eating too. They are bringing us water and they promise to bring us electricity. We did not have those things before; that is why I say we are eating too.' 'Defend them, Couple,' cried someone in the audience to him. 'Are you not one of them when it comes to eating aged guinea-fowls?' This brought a good deal of laughter but again it was a slack, resigned laughter. No one seemed ready to follow up the reprimand or join issue with Couple for defending his fellow racketeers. Up to this point Max had spoken slowly and deliberately, with very little heat. But now, as he accused the present regime of trying to establish itself as a privileged class sitting on the back of the rest of us, his hands and his voice began to shake. 'Whether it is P. O. P. or P. A. P. they are the same,' he cried. 'The same ten and ten pence,' agreed someone in English. 'They want to share out the wealth of the country between them. That is why you must reject both; that is why we have now formed the C. P. C. as a party of the ordinary people like yourselves. ... Once upon a time a hunter killed some big-game at night. He searched for it in vain and at last he decided to go home and await daylight. At the first light of morning he returned to the forest full of expectation. And what do you think he found? He saw two vultures fighting over what still remained of the carcass. In great anger he loaded his gun and shot the two dirty uneatable birds. You may say that he was foolish to waste his bullet on them but I say no. He was angry and he wanted to wipe out the dirty thieves fighting over another man's inheritance. That hunter is yourselves. Yes, you and you and you. And the two vultures---P. O. P. and P. A. P....' There was loud applause. Jolly good, I thought. 'There were three vultures,' said the ex-policeman after the applause had subsided. 'The third and youngest was called C. P. C.' 'Why don't you leave the young man alone to tell us his story?' asked one elderly woman smoking a short clay pipe. But many people obviously thought the ex-policeman very witty and I saw one or two shaking his hand. Towards the end of his speech Max made one point which frankly I thought unworthy of him or of C. P. C. but I suppose I am too finicky. 'We all know,' he said, 'what one dog said to another. He said: "If I fall for you this time and you fall for me next time then I know it is play not fight." Last time you elected a Member of Parliament from Anata. Now it is your turn here in Urua. A goat does not eat into a hen's stomach no matter how friendly the two may be. Ours is ours but mine is mine. I present as my party's candidate your own son, Odili Samalu...' He walked over to me and held my hand up and the crowd cheered and cheered. An elderly man who I believe was also a local councillor now stood up. He had sat on the edge of his seat directly opposite the microphone, his two hands like a climber's grasping his iron staff. His attitude and posture had shown total absorption in what was being said: 'I want to thank the young man for his beautiful words,' he said. 'Every one of them has entered my ear. I always say that what is important nowadays is no longer age or title but knowledge. The young man clearly has it and I salute him. There is one word he said which entered my ear more than everything else---not only entered but built a house there. I don't know whether you others heard it in the same way as I did. That word was that our own son should go and bring our share.' There was great applause from the crowd. 'That word entered my ear. The village of Anata has already eaten, now they must make way for us to reach the plate. No man in Urua will give his paper to a stranger when his own son needs it; if the very herb we go to seek in the forest now grows at our very back yard are we not saved the journey? We are ignorant people and we are like children. But I want to tell our son one thing: He already knows where to go and what to say when he gets there; he should tell them that we are waiting here like a babe cutting its first tooth: anyone who wants to look at our new tooth should know that his bag should be heavy. Have I spoken well?' 'Yes,' answered the crowd as they began to disperse. Later I called Max aside and told him excitedly and in a few words about Chief Nanga's visit. 'You should have taken the money from him,' he replied. 'What?' I was thunderstruck. 'Chief Koko offered me one thousand pounds,' he continued placidly. 'I consulted the other boys and we decided to accept. It paid for that minibus...' 'I don't understand you, Max. Are you telling me that you have taken money and stepped down for P. O. P.?' 'I am telling you nothing of the sort. The paper I signed has no legal force whatever and we needed the money...' 'It had moral force,' I said, downcast. 'I am sorry, Max, but I think you have committed a big blunder. I thought we wanted our fight to be clean... You had better look out; they will be even more vicious from now on and people will say they have cause.' I was really worried. If our people understand nothing else they know that a man who takes money from another in return for service must render that service or remain vulnerable to that man's just revenge. Neither God nor juju would save him. 'Oh, forget that. Do you know, Odili, that British Amalgamated has paid out four hundred thousand pounds to P. O. P. to fight this election? Yes, and we also know that the Americans have been even more generous, although we don't have the figures as yet. Now you tell me how you propose to fight such a dirty war without soiling your hands a little. Just you tell me. Anyway we must be moving on to Abaga now. I'll be here again in a couple of days to iron out everything and let you know our detailed plans from now on. Meanwhile, old boy, if the offer comes again take it. It's as much your money as his...' 'Never!' 'Anyway, the question is purely academic now... Your old man is a wonderful fellow. I like him.' Seeing Max and Eunice once again, sharing every excitement, had made my mouth water, to put it crudely. As Max made his speech I had found myself watching Eunice's beautiful profile. She sat at the edge of her chair, wringing her clasped hands like a nervous schoolgirl. Her lips seemed to be forming the same words that he was uttering. Perhaps it was this delicious picture of feminine loyalty that led me early next day to abandon my carefully worked out strategy and go in search of Edna. I meant to tell her point-blank that I was in love with her, and let the whole world know about it as well. If she said no to me because I had not stolen public money and didn't have a Cadillac, well and good, I should go and bear it like a man. But I was determined not to carry on this surreptitious corner- corner love business one day longer. It would be wonderful, I thought, if I could present her to Max on his next visit here. He would be envious, I knew. Edna might not be a lawyer or sophisticated in the nail-varnish, eyebrowshadow line like Eunice, but any man who passed Edna on the road and didn't look back must have a stiff neck. And as far as I was concerned she had just the right amount of education. I had nothing against professional women---in fact I liked them in their way---but if emancipation meant people like that other lady lawyer who came to sleep with illiterate Chief Nanga for twenty-five pounds a time (as he confided to me next morning), then they could keep it. During the fifteen-mile journey to Anata which took the greater part of forty minutes because of the corrugated laterite surface, I worked out what I was going to say. What was important was not so much what I said but that I should say it decisively and not like a mumbling schoolboy. If the answer wasn't yes it would be no; as they say, there are only two things you could do with yam---if you don't boil it, you roast it. Or perhaps I should preface my declaration with an account of what had been happening to me since we saw last. Yes, she would certainly like to hear how her famous suitor came to me in the dark like Nicodemus and offered me two-fifty pounds. She would like that and if her greedy father was around it would make his mouth water into the bargain, and raise my standing in his eyes. Then I remembered that last night as I thought about the offer I had been really angry again about it all. Not only about Max disgracing our party and yet having the face to charge me with idealism and navety, but I couldn't help feeling small at the inevitable comparison of the amounts offered to him and me. Not that it mattered; I would still have refused if it had been ten thousand. The real point surely was that Max's action had jeopardized our moral position, our ability to inspire that kind of terror which I had seen so clearly in Nanga's eyes despite all his grandiloquent bluff, and which in the end was our society's only hope of salvation. I clearly saw Edna withdrawing hurriedly from the front room as I drove up. Women! No matter how beautiful they are they always try to be more---and usually fail; though in Edna's case she was great with face powder and the rest, and great without them. Her younger brother was alone in the room. He stood up as I came in and said: 'Good morning, sir.' 'Good morning,' I said. 'Was it you brought me the letter?' 'Yes, sir.' 'Thank you.' 'Yes, sir.' 'What is that you are reading?' He held out The Sorrows of Satan, one finger of his left hand still thrust into it to mark the page. I sat down. 'Is Edna in?' 'No, sir.' 'What...? Who did I see as I came up?' He mumbled something confusedly. 'Go and call her!' He stood where he was, looking on the floor. 'I said go and call her!' I shouted, rising to my feet. He made no move. 'All right,' I said. 'Edna!' I bawled out loud enough for the entire village to hear. She immediately came hurrying back. What the hell is all this, or words to that effect, were on the tip of my tongue; but I wasn't allowed to say them. Edna wore a tightened-bow countenance you couldn't have thought possible on that face, and her tongue when she spoke (which was immediately) stung into me like the tail of a scorpion. I recoiled, tongue-tied. 'Some men have no shame. Can't you go and look for your own woman instead of sneaking around here? My father has told you to stop coming here, or have you come to pick up some gossip for your friend Mrs Nanga? A big fellow like you should be ashamed of gossiping like a woman. Errand boy, go and tell her I will marry Chief Nanga. Let her come and jump on my back if she can. As for you, why don't you go back to your prostitute-woman in Bori instead of wasting your time here? I have been respecting you for the sake of Chief Nanga, but if you make the mistake of coming here again I will tell you that my name is Edna Odo'---She turned to go, stopped again, called me 'Mr Gossipper' in English and rushed away.... 'You better go before Dogo comes back. He says he will castrate you.' This was from the boy, and it came after I had been standing rooted to the ground for I don't know how long. Dogo? Dogo? Who was he? I thought sluggishly like a slowed up action film.... Oh yes, Dogo the one- eyed bull. So he was guarding her. Well, well, good luck to them! The first shock, the tightening in the throat passed very quickly, certainly by the time I had reversed my car and headed off. In retrospect my behaviour and reaction seemed to have broken all the rules in the book. I should have driven away in a daze, but I didn't. On the contrary my mind was as clear as daylight. The injustice of Edna's incoherent accusations most of which I couldn't even remotely relate to myself or anything I knew did not make me angry. Neither did the terrible thought that Chief Nanga had won the second round. What I felt was sadness---a sadness deep and cool like a well, into which my hopes had fallen; my twin hopes of a beautiful life with Edna and of a new era of cleanliness in the politics of our country. A thought sneaked into my mind and told me it was futile now to try and go through with my political plans which in all honesty I should admit had always been a little nebulous---until Edna came along. She had been like a dust particle in the high atmosphere around which the water vapour of my thinking formed its globule of rain. But I knew I would not heed that counsel, wherever it came from. The knowledge that Chief Nanga had won the first two rounds and, on the present showing, would win the third and last far from suggesting thoughts of surrender to my mind served to harden my resolution. What I had to accomplish became more than another squabble for political office; it rose suddenly to the heights of symbolic action, a shining, monumental gesture untainted by hopes of success or reward. Chief Nanga moved swiftly and, as you would expect, ruthlessly. I was listening on my new portable transistor radio to the twelve o'clock news on the following Sunday morning. Those days I did not miss a single news bulletin. If I was likely not to be home at twelve, four, six or ten, I took my radio with me. It was a fine Japanese affair, no bigger than a camera, with an ear-piece which meant you could insulate yourself from the noisiest of surroundings. If I was driving somewhere I would park on the roadside until the news was over. There were two reasons why I listened so avidly. In the first place news-thirst becomes a craving for every political activist, a kind of occupational disease. Secondly I wanted to keep a close watch on the antics of our national radio system which incidentally had not so far said a single word about the existence of our new party even though we had kept them fully informed of our activities. My Boniface and the others soon developed the same news-thirst, only they never did seem able to listen with their ears alone; they must pass their very loud comment at the same time, which was very distracting to me especially as their understanding of the news was sketchy and often fantastically distorted. So I began to cut them off by using the ear gadget. 'A-a, weting happen to the news?' asked puzzled Boniface the first time I played this trick. 'Radio done spoil,' I said. 'I just de hear am small for my ear now.' 'We must go repairam,' he said. 'E no good make man de for darkness.' Two days later I had relented. I told them I had repaired the radio myself which impressed them a lot. The fact was I had begun to feel mean about cutting my faithful companions from their source of light. But also I had been missing Boniface's 'Tief-man', 'Foolis-man' and similar invective aimed at Chief Nanga and his ministerial colleagues whenever their names came up in the news---which was about every five seconds at normal peaceful times and much more frequently in these critical days. But to return to the Sunday morning. I was listening in the outhouse with the cynical amusement to which our radio station had now made me accustomed. I no longer had hopes of our latest story ever being used. I had thought that, with the telegram I had sent them on Friday, they would have been forced into giving us a brief mention. After all it was the first public appearance of a new party, the C. P. C., and the tacit support given my candidature by my village ought not to go unrecorded. True enough, my village was only one out of several in the constituency and their action might not affect the final verdict but what they had done was news by any definition of that word known to the civilized world. But once more I listened in vain. Instead they announced Chief Nanga's inaugural campaign which had not even taken place! It was to happen on Monday week in Anata. Perhaps I should go and see it. I was dully thinking about this when my father's name coming out of the radio stung me into full life. It was announced that Mr Hezekiah Samalu, chairman of P. O. P. in Urua, had been 'ignominiously removed from his office for subversive, anti-party activities, according to an announcement received this morning from the P. O. P. Bureau of Investigation and Publicity'. I rushed into the main house and broke the news to my father who was then eating pounded yams and pepper soup at his small round table. He swallowed the ball of food in his hand and licked the soup from his fingers. I thought he was then going to say something. But he only shrugged his shoulders, drew out his lower lip in a gesture which said eloquently 'Their own palaver, not mine', and continued eating. The next day, however, the palaver came closer home. The local council Tax Assessment Officer brought him a reassessed figure based not only on his known pension of eighty-four pounds a year but on an alleged income of five hundred pounds derived from 'business'. 'What business?' everyone asked. But there was no time to explain. In the evening three local council policemen looking like 'wee-wee' or marijuana smokers came to arrest him and in fact proceeded to manhandle him. I had to find twenty-four pounds fairly smartly; fortunately I had just enough C. P. C. money in the house to cover it. I threatened to take the matter up and the rascals laughed in my face. 'Na only up you go take am?' asked their leader. 'If I be you I go take am down too, when I done finish take am up. Turn you back make I see the nyarsh you go take fight Nanga.' 'Foolis-man,' said one of the others as they left The culmination came at the weekend when seven Public Works lorries arrived in the village and began to cart away the pipes they had deposited several months earlier for our projected Rural Water Scheme. This was the first indication we had that the Authorities did in fact hear of our little ceremony. Which was some consolation. It is a sad truth of our nature that man becomes too easily brutalized by circumstance. The day after the tax incident I suddenly boiled over. I knew that Edna was still on the edge of my consciousness. I walked up stealthily from behind and pushed her down the precipice---out of my mind. I wrote to her. 'Dear Edna,' I said, 'I wonder who ever put it into your beautiful empty head that I want to take you from your precious man. What on earth do you think I would want to do with a girl who has no more education than lower Elementary? By all means marry your ancient man and if you find that he is not up to it you can always steal away to his son's bed. Yours truly, Odili Samalu.' CHAPTER THIRTEEN Two nights later we heard the sound of the Crier's gong. His message was unusual. In the past the Crier had summoned the village to a meeting to deliberate over a weighty question, or else to some accustomed communal labour. His business was to serve notice of something that was to happen. But this night he did something new: he announced a decision already taken. The elders and the councillors of Urua and the whole people, he said, had decided that in the present political fight raging in the land they should make it known that they knew one man and one man alone---Chief Nanga. Every man and every woman in Urua and every child and every adult would throw his or her paper for him on the day of election---as they had done in the past. If there was any other name called in the matter the elders and councillors of Urua had not heard it. He said this over and over again with minor changes in detail, like the omission of 'every child' which I noticed particularly because it had struck me as odd in the first place. And I thought: if the whole people had taken the decision why were they now being told of it? In the afternoon the radio, our national Crier, took up the message, amplified it and gave it in four languages including English. I listened to it, as I had listened to the rustic version, wearing my cynical smile. I couldn't say I blamed my village people for recoiling from the role of sacrificial ram. Why should they lose their chance of getting good, clean water, their share of the national cake? In fact they had adequate justification for their volte-face just two days later when the pipes returned. Or, at any rate, some of them returned. The rest apparently had been sent irrevocably to the neighbouring village of Ichida whose inhabitants had also been promised water but hadn't so far seen even one pipe. So the result of all my exertion had been to give Nanga one stone to kill two birds with. When I came back with my newspapers the next day I was told that Councillor 'Couple' had come to see my father with a promise that if he signed a certain document his recent tax levy would be refunded to him. The document merely sought to dissociate him from his son's lunatic activities; it also said that the so-called launching of C. P. C. in his premises was done without his knowledge and consent and concluded by affirming his implicit confidence in our great and God-fearing leader, Chief Nanga. I could visualize my father reading it carefully with his now rarely used spectacles and, then putting his glasses aside, telling the fellow to carry his corpse off. And he must have run---so much so that he left the document behind. 'You made a serious mistake today,' I told my father later that day. 'In your eyes have I ever done anything else in all my life?' 'I am talking about this paper you refused to sign.' He was silent for a while, then he said: 'You may be right. But our people have said that a man of worth never gets up to unsay what he said yesterday. I received your friends in my house and I am not going to deny it.' I thought to myself: You do not belong to this age, old man. Men of worth nowadays simply forget what they said yesterday. Then I realized that I had never really been close enough to my father to understand him. I had built up a private picture of him from unconnected scraps of evidence. Was this the same D. O.'s Interpreter who made a fortune out of the ignorance of poor, illiterate villagers and squandered it on drink and wives or had I got everything terribly, lopsidedly wrong? Anyway, this was no time to begin a new assessment; it was better left to the tax people. 'But one thing I must make clear,' he said suddenly. 'You have brought this trouble into my compound so you should carry it. From today whatever new tax they decide upon I will pass the paper to you.' 'That is a small matter,' I said smiling, and I did mean that it was a small matter. I don't know what put it into my head to go to Chief Nanga's inaugural campaign meeting. Did I want to learn some new trick that I could put to use in my own campaign against him, or was it naked curiosity---the kind that they say earned Monkey a bullet in the forehead? Whatever it was, I went. But I took great pains to disguise myself first---with a hat and sun-glasses. I thought of taking Boniface and the others, but decided they were likely to attract attention and trouble. So I went alone. I parked my car outside the Post Office and walked the three hundred yards or so to the Court premises where the meeting was already in progress. The time on my watch was just a little after four. Even if I hadn't known my way in Anata I could still have found the meeting easily enough. The sound of drums and guns beckoned you on. And there were hundreds of other people going like me to the place. As I got closer I could hear a brass band too---no doubt the Anata Central School. I passed many villagers I knew and who should remember one who was until recently a teacher at the Grammar School, but they obviously had no clue who I was, which showed how good my disguise was. One such person was Josiah, the renegade trader. Those days he walked like a fowl drenched by rain. I came from behind and overtook him. As soon as I turned into the Court premises my eyes caught Chief Nanga and his party sitting on a high platform solidly built from new timber. Of course I only noticed details like the timber when I had worked my way through the crowd to a closer position by ruthlessly widening every crack I saw in front of me and squeezing through, receiving abuses at my back. What I did see right away and what pulled me towards the dais was Edna sitting there on one side of Chief Nanga, much as she had done on that first day, like a convent girl. Mrs Nanga sat on the other side of her husband. All the other people on the platform so far were men, but there were still many empty chairs. When I had got to a point in the thick of the crowd from where I could observe the faces on the dais without attracting their attention I stopped. The dais was surrounded by characters who looked as if they might be able to assist the police in various outstanding investigations. One-eyed Dogo was among them. Then of course there were the placard-carrying Nanga- vanga boys wearing silken, green, cowboy dresses. I noticed that none of the placards today had my name; I shouldn't have blabbed to Nanga about it. There were also about half a dozen policemen around---just in case, which was unlikely in this friendly crowd. I was choking with the acrid smell of other people's sweat and wondered if the ceremony would ever begin. Chief Nanga sat, smiling and cool in his white robes. His wife looking grandly matriarchal in a blue velvet 'up- and-down' fanned herself with one of these delta-shaped Japanese fans, clearly too small and inadequate. Occasionally she lifted the neck of her blouse in front and blew left and right into her bosom. Edna just sat. At last the ceremony seemed about to begin. Some party official wearing the green P. O. P. cap consulted with Chief Nanga who nodded several times, looking at his watch. Then the official grabbed the microphone and began to test it. His shrill voice amplified a hundredfold startled the crowd and then sent them laughing at their own fright. Something seemed to go wrong because the voice was superseded by one prolonged ear-tearing whistle. All other noises had stopped, and soon the highpitched whistle stopped too. The man counted one to ten and the crowd laughed again. Then he announced that he was the M. C. He said the man before us needed no introduction (hell, I thought, not again!)---'he was no other than the great Honourable Minister Chief Doctor (in advance) M.A. Nanga.' I did not listen to the many virtues of Chief Nanga as enumerated by this M. C., partly because I knew them very well already but also because the fellow having presumably lost his own eardrums long ago was showing no respect at all to ours... I put my hands over the ears to break the sharp-pointed assault. And to pass the time while waiting for Nanga's speech I began to exercise my fancy. What would happen if I were to push my way to the front and up the palm-leaf-festooned dais, wrench the microphone from the greasy hands of that blabbing buffoon and tell the whole people---this vast contemptible crowd---that the great man they had come to hear with their drums and dancing was an Honourable Thief. But of course they knew that already. No single man and woman there that afternoon was stranger to that news---not even the innocent-looking convent girl on the dais. And because they all knew, if I were to march up to the dais now and announce it they would simply laugh at me and say: What a fool! Whose son is he? Was he not here when white men were eating; what did he do about it? Where was he when Chief Nanga fought and drove the white men away? Why is he envious now that the warrior is eating the reward of his courage? If he was Chief Nanga, would he not do much worse? These questions would not, of course, be spread out into so many words; more likely they would be compressed into a few sharp blows to the head.... As my mind dozed lazily on these fanciful thoughts I saw Josiah, the outlawed trader, mount the few steps to the dais and whisper to Chief Nanga who sprang up immediately searching the crowd. Josiah then turned round and pointed in my direction. I turned sharply at the same time and began to push blindly through the crowd, panic-stricken, appearing to make no progress whatever. Then I heard the loudspeakers call out to the crowd to stop that man wearing a hat and dark glasses. I took off the hat. For a brief moment nothing happened and I struggled through a few more bodies. Then some tentative hands tried to stop me from behind but I shook them off and continued to push and shove. 'I said stop that thief trying to run away!' screamed the loudspeaker. The hands gained a little resolution and one vaguely-seen body stood firmly in my way. But I was not running any more then. I wanted to know who called me a thief. So I turned round and was pushed forward from three sides to the foot of the dais. 'Odili the great,' saluted Chief Nanga. Then he took the microphone and said: 'My people, this is the boy who wants to take my seat.' The announcement was greeted by a wild uproar, compounded of disbelief, shock and contemptuous laughter. 'Come up here,' said Nanga. 'They want to see you.' I was pushed up the steps to the dais. As I went up I noticed that Edna had covered her face with both hands. 'My people,' said Nanga again. 'This is the boy who is thrusting his finger into my eye. He came to my house in Bori, ate my food, drank my water and my wine and instead of saying thank you to me he set about plotting how to drive me out and take over my house.' The crowd roared again. My panic had now left me entirely and in its place I found a rock-cold fearlessness that I had never before felt in my heart. I watched Nanga, microphone in one hand, reeling about the dais in drunken jubilation. I seemed to see him from a superior, impregnable position. 'I hear some people asking who is he: I will tell you. He was once my pupil. I taught him ABC and I called him to my house to arrange for him to go to England. Yes, I take the blame; he did not just smell his hand one morning and go to my house---I called him. Anyone who wants to may blame me.' There were louder cries of shock at such an unspeakable betrayal. 'He even tried to take a girl on whose head I had put the full bride-price and many other expenses---and who according to our custom is my wife--this girl here....' He went over to Edna and roughly pulled her hands away from her face. 'He tried to take this girl who is covering her face for shame. Fortunately my wife caught him and told me.' He turned aside from the crowd to me. 'Odili the great! So you have come to seek me out again. You are very brave; or have you come to seek Edna, eh? That's it. Come to the microphone and tell my people why you came; they are listening...' He thrust the microphone into my face. 'I came to tell your people that you are a liar and...' He pulled the microphone away smartly, set it down, walked up to me and slapped my face. Immediately hands seized my arms, but I am happy that he got one fairly good kick from me. He slapped me again and again. Edna rushed forward crying and tried to get between us but he pushed her aside so violently that she landed on her buttocks on the wooden platform. The roar of the crowd was now like a thick forest all around. By this time blows were falling as fast as rain on my head and body until something heavier than the rest seemed to split my skull. The last thing I remembered was seeing all the policemen turn round and walk quietly away. The events of the next four weeks or so have become so widely known in the world at large that there would be little point in my relating them in any detail here. And in any case, while those events were happening I was having a few private problems of my own. My cracked cranium took a little time to mend---to say nothing of the broken arm and countless severe bruises one of which all but turned me into a kind of genealogical cul-de-sac. I remember the first time I woke up in the hospital and felt my head turbanned like an Alhaji. Everything seemed unreal and larger than life and I was sure I was dreaming. In the dream I saw Edna and my father and Mama standing around my bed. I also saw, through a gap in the screen, two policemen. But the only thing that was immediate and in focus was that pressure trapped inside the head pounding away in a panic effort to escape. I tried to feel my turban but the pain followed my thought to the arm---and I went off again. The next time I looked around me my father and Mama and the policemen were still there, and they looked more solid than the last time. Edna had vanished. Perhaps her figure had been planted there in the first place by my fevered fancy. I wondered---in a dull, faraway manner---what the police were doing beside my bed. But I did not wonder too much nor too long. Every other single thing was strange anyway and two policemen (or four when they were changing guards) didn't make much difference. (Perhaps it was their way of making amends for their desertion when I had needed them.) But one morning I woke up to find they had disappeared. 'Where are they?' I asked the nurse who brought my medicine. 'They done go.' 'But why?' 'You de ask why, instead to thank God that they done withdraw your case?' My case? I tried hard to remember but couldn't and gave up. My father should be coming any minute now and he would know. But when he came and I asked him he refused to tell, saying I should get better first. But I kept at him until he said yes, I had been under arrest for being found in possession of dangerous weapons. 'Found, where? Who found me?' 'In your car. They said five matchets were found in your car and two double-barrelled guns. Anyway they have now withdrawn the case.' My thoughts were slowly coming into focus. 'What day is the election?' 'I don't know.' 'Say you won't tell me, but not that you don't know,' I said petulantly. 'Could I have my radio?' 'Not yet; the doctor says you are to rest.' The next day I asked again and if only to save himself from my pestering importunity he said yes, the thugs had ransacked my car, overturned it and set it on fire; then after I had been brought to hospital I was placed under arrest ostensibly for having weapons in my car but really to prevent me from signing my nomination paper. 'Nomination paper? But I have already signed it,' I said. 'No, that first one never reached the Electoral Officer. It was seized by thugs from your people on their way to the Electoral Office...' I tried to sit up but he pressed me back; not that I could have made it, anyway. 'Now I have told you. Don't ask me any more questions, do you hear me? Even in this hospital you cannot say who is a friend and who an enemy. That is why I am here so much.' He said this quietly and with a backward glance. 'Max came here in person with a new nomination paper for you but they turned him back.' 'I see.' It was in fact election day as we spoke. My father found it easy to conceal the fact from me because they had put me in a special isolated ward. That same night Max was killed in Abaga but I didn't hear of it either, until two days after; and then I wept all day that day, and the pressure inside my head returned and I hoped I would die, but the doctor put me to sleep. As I got the story later from Joe, the trade-unionist, Max had been informed by our party intelligence that Chief Koko's resourceful wife was leading the Women's Wing of the P. O. P. in an operation that one might describe as breast-feeding the ballot, i. e. smuggling into the polling booths wads of ballot paper concealed in their brassires. Max immediately investigated. But as soon as he alighted from his car, one of Chief Koko's jeeps swept up from behind, knocked him over and killed him on the spot. The police, most of whom turned out to be disguised party thugs, performed half-hearted motions to arrest the driver of the jeep but Chief S. I. Koko came forward and told them not to worry; he would handle the matter himself. Eunice had been missed by a few inches when Max had been felled. She stood like a stone figure, I was told, for some minutes more. Then she opened her handbag as if to take out a handkerchief, took out a pistol instead and fired two bullets into Chief Koko's chest. Only then did she fall down on Max's body and begin to weep like a woman; and then the policemen seized her and dragged her away. A very strange girl, people said. The fighting which broke out that night between Max's bodyguard and Chief Koko's thugs in Abaga struck a match and lit the tinder of discontent in the land. Nearer home in Anata Chief Nanga, having been elected unopposed, tried to disband his private army, if only to save himself their keep; but some of them refused to be disbanded and staged a minor battle in which Dogo (the one- eyed bodyguard) lost an ear. Then they went on a rampage, sacking one market after another in the district, seizing women's wares and beating up people. My father's youngest wife lost her entire stock of dried fish in our village market during one of their raids and got a swollen face instead. Other election thugs in different parts of the country hearing of the successes of Chief Nanga's people quickly formed their own bands of marauders. And so a minor reign of terror began. Meanwhile the Prime Minister had appointed Chief Nanga and the rest of the old Cabinet back to office and announced over the radio that he intended to govern and stamp out subversion and thuggery without quarter or mercy. He assured foreign investors that their money was safe in the country, that his government stood 'as firm as the Rock of Gibraltar' by its open-door economic policy. 'This country,' he said, 'has never been more united or more stable than it is today.' He nominated Chief Koko's widow to the Senate and from there made her Minister for Women's Affairs, intending to quieten the powerful guild of Bori market women who had become restive. Some political commentators have said that it was the supreme cynicism of these transactions that inflamed the people and brought down the Government. That is sheer poppycock. The people themselves, as we have seen, had become even more cynical than their leaders and were apathetic into the bargain. 'Let them eat,' was the people's opinion, 'after all when white men used to do all the eating did we commit suicide?' Of course not. And where is the all-powerful white man today? He came, he ate and he went. But we are still around. The important thing then is to stay alive; if you do you will outlive your present annoyance. The great thing, as the old people have told us, is reminiscence; and only those who survive can have it. Besides, if you survive, who knows? it may be your turn to eat tomorrow. Your son may bring home your share. No, the people had nothing to do with the fall of our Government. What happened was simply that unruly mobs and private armies having tasted blood and power during the election had got out of hand and ruined their masters and employers. And they had no public reason whatever for doing it. Let's make no mistake about that. One day just before I left hospital Edna came to see me. We looked at each other without speaking. What could I say about that letter in which I had called her an uneducated girl and said many other crude things besides? But attack, they say, is the best defence. So I attacked. 'Congratulations,' I said. 'I will never contest his seat again.' I smiled falsely. She said nothing, just stood where she was, staring at me with those round, rock-melting eyes. 'I am terribly sorry, Edna,' I said. 'I have behaved like an animal... I will always remember that in all that crowd you were the only one who tried to help me.' My eyes clouded. 'Don't cry,' I said when I looked at her again and found my tears running down her face. 'Please, my love, don't. Come and sit here.' And SHE DID. 'Edna, I don't know... I feel like a beast... believe me... about that letter... I was so unhappy... you can't imagine how miserable I was. Will you ever forgive me?' 'Forgive you? For what? Everything you said in it is true.' 'Oh please don't talk like that, Edna. I know how you must feel. But please I didn't mean to... you know. I was so confused and I didn't want to... I didn't want you to go and marry that idiot. That was why... To God...' I tried instinctively to seal the oath by touching my lips and pointing to the sky with my swearing finger, forgetting momentarily in my confusion that my right arm was in plaster. I was reminded soon enough, and changed to my left finger which felt odd. 'Marry him? To be frank with you I did not want to marry him... All the girls in the college were laughing at me... It was only my father... I don't claim to know book but at least...' 'Oh please, Edna---' '... at least I thank God that I am better than some people with all their minister and everything. He is no better than any bush, jaguda man, with all his money. And what you said, about his wife's jealousy---' 'Wait a bit,' I said, something having clicked inside my head and told me to pay some attention to what the other party was saying. 'Wait a bit. Are we talking about my first letter or the second?' 'Second? Which second letter? Did you write two?' 'Yes, after I came to see you,' I said and then said to myself: Don't let up man! Attack and cover your defences. 'Yes, when I came to see you and you made me so miserable... I wrote; you mean you didn't get it?' 'No, I did not. After you came to see me?... It must be one of those the postmaster handed over to him.' 'Postmaster? I don't understand.' 'Oh, you didn't hear? The postmaster and the man are like this.' She dovetailed her fingers. 'He was passing all my letters to him.' 'No! What a beast!' 'Have you ever seen a thing like that? It was only God that saved me from his hands.' 'God and Odili.' 'Yes, and Odili... What did you say in it?' 'In what? Oh the letter... Yes, well, the usual things.' 'Tell me.' 'I will, later. Let's talk about new things now, about our future plans.' After a short silence of contemplation on this unbelievable piece of good fortune I said somewhat light-heartedly: 'A whole Cabinet Minister prying into a little girl's love-letters!' 'Have you ever seen such bad luck!' said Edna, and then something seemed to dawn on her and she asked: 'But who is a little girl?' I smiled and squeezed her hand, then pursued my own thoughts aloud. 'The inquisitive eye will only blind its own sight,' I pronounced. 'A man who insists on peeping into his neighbour's bedroom knowing a woman to be there is only punishing himself.' It was then Edna's turn to squeeze my good hand. We heard my father's voice greeting the nurse in the main ward and Edna quickly got up from my bed and sat on a chair. 'Ah, my daughter!' he said. 'You have kept away so long. I began to think I had frightened you away.' 'No, sir,' she said embarrassed. 'Frightened her away? How?' 'I told her I was going to marry her for one of my sons that day she spent a whole night with us here...' 'So it wasn't a dream?' 'What dream?' 'Never mind, father. What I mean is you should marry her for this son here.' 'That remains to be seen.' After my illness my father, some of his close relatives and I went with a big pot of palm-wine to Edna's father to start a 'conversation'. The first few visits we made no headway at all. Our host simply refused to believe that he had lost a Chief and Minister as son-in-law and must now settle for this crazy boy who had bought a tortoise and called it a car. But the Army obliged us by staging a coup at that point and locking up every member of the Government. The rampaging bands of election thugs had caused so much unrest and dislocation that our young Army officers seized the opportunity to take over. We were told Nanga was arrested trying to escape by canoe dressed like a fisherman. Thereafter we made rapid progress with Edna's father who, no doubt, saw me then as a bird in hand. He told us that Chief Nanga had paid a bride-price of one hundred and fifty pounds for his daughter and another one hundred pounds on her education and other incidentals. Was that all? I thought. 'Our custom,' said my father firmly, 'is to return the bride-price---finish. Other bits and pieces must be the man's loss. Is that not the custom?' Our party said yes, that was the custom. As indeed it was. But I was not interested in legalistic- traditional arguments just now, especially when they were calculated to delay things (a coup might be followed by a counter coup and then where would we be?); and anyway I did not want to go through life thinking that I owed Chief Nanga money spent on my wife's education. So I agreed---to my people's astonishment---to pay everything. 'Let us go outside and whisper together,' said my scandalized relations. I said a flat no and they shrugged their acquiescence, astonished at my firmness---and pleased, because we admire firmness. I had already decided privately to borrow the money from C. P. C. funds still in my hands. They were not likely to be needed soon, especially as the military regime had just abolished all political parties in the country and announced they would remain abolished 'until the situation became stabilized once again'. They had at the same time announced the impending trial of all public servants who had enriched themselves by defrauding the state. The figure involved was said to be in the order of fifteen million pounds. But their most touching gesture as far as I was concerned was to release Eunice from jail and pronounce Max a Hero of the Revolution. (For I must point out that my severe criticism of his one fatal error notwithstanding, Max was indeed a hero and martyr; and I propose to found a school---a new type of school, I hasten to add---in my village to his memory.) What I found distasteful however was the sudden, unashamed change of front among the very people who had stood by and watched him die. Overnight everyone began to shake their heads at the excesses of the last regime, at its graft, oppression and corrupt government: newspapers, the radio, the hitherto silent intellectuals and civil servants---everybody said what a terrible lot; and it became public opinion the next morning. And these were the same people that only the other day had owned a thousand names of adulation, whom praisesingers followed with song and talking-drum wherever they went. Chief Koko in particular became a thief and a murderer, while the people who had led him on---in my opinion the real culprits---took the legendary bath of the Hornbill and donned innocence. 'Koko had taken enough for the owner to see,' said my father to me. It was the day I had gone to visit Eunice and was telling him on my return how the girl had showed no interest in anything---including whether she stayed in jail or out of it. My father's words struck me because they were the very same words the villagers of Anata had spoken of Josiah, the abominated trader. Only in their case the words had meaning. The owner was the village, and the village had a mind; it could say no to sacrilege. But in the affairs of the nation there was no owner, the laws of the village became powerless. Max was avenged not by the people's collective will but by one solitary woman who loved him. Had his spirit waited for the people to demand redress it would have been waiting still, in the rain and out in the sun. But he was lucky. And I don't mean it to shock or to sound clever. For I do honestly believe that in the fat- dripping, gummy, eat-and-let-eat regime just ended---a regime which inspired the common saying that a man could only be sure of what he had put away safely in his gut or, in language ever more suited to the times: 'you chop, me self I chop, palaver finish'; a regime in which you saw a fellow cursed in the morning for stealing a blind man's stick and later in the evening saw him again mounting the altar of the new shrine in the presence of all the people to whisper into the ear of the chief celebrant---in such a regime, I say, you died a good death if your life had inspired someone to come forward and shoot your mur derer in the chest---without asking to be paid. The End
<|book_end|>

<|book_start|>
The Madman He was drawn to markets and straight roads. Not any tiny neighbourhood market where a handful of garrulous women might gather at sunset to gossip and buy ogili for the evening's soup, but a huge, engulfing bazaar beckoning people familiar and strange from far and near. And not any dusty, old footpath beginning in this village, and ending in that stream, but broad, black, mysterious highways without beginning or end. After much wandering he had discovered two such markets linked together by such a highway; and so ended his wandering. One market was AfQ, the other Eke. The two days between them suited him very well: before setting out for Eke he had ample time to wind up his business properly at AfQ. He passed the night there putting right again his hut after a day of defilement by two fat-bottomed market women who said it was their market stall. At first he had put up a fight but the women had gone and brought their menfolk-four hefty beasts of the bush-to whip him out of the hut. After that he always avoided them, moving out on the morning of the market and back in at dusk to pass the night. Then in the morning he rounded off his affairs swiftly and set out on that long, beautiful boa-constrictor of a road to Eke in the distant town of Ogbu. He held his staff and cudgel at the ready in his right hand, and with the left he steadied the basket of his belongings on his head. He had got himself this cudgel lately to deal with little beasts on the way who threw stones at him and made fun of their mothers' nakedness, not his own. He used to walk in the middle of the road, holding it in conversation. But one day the driver of a mammywagon and his mate came down on him shouting, pushing and slapping his face. They said their lorry very nearly ran over their mother, not him. After that he avoided those noisy lorries too, with the vagabonds inside them. Having walked one day and one night he was now close to the Eke market-place. From every little sideroad, crowds of market people poured into the big highway to join the enormous fl ow to Eke. Then he saw some young ladies with water-pots on their heads coming towards him, unlike all the rest, away from the market. This surprised him. Then he saw two more water-pots rise out of a sloping footpath leading off his side of the highway. He felt thirsty then and stopped to think it ovel: Then he set down his basket on the roadside and turned into the sloping footpath. But first he begged his highway not to be offended or continue the journey without him. "I'll get some for you too," he said coaxingly with a tender backward glance. "I know you are thirsty." Nwibe was a man of high standing in Ogbu and was rising higher; a man of wealth and integrity. He had just given notice to all the QZQ men of the town that he proposed to seek admission into their honoured hierarchy in the coming initiation season. "Your proposal is excellent," said the men of title. "When we see we shan believe." Which was their dignUied way of telling you to think it over once again and make sure you have the means to go through with it. For QZQ is not a child's naming ceremony; and where is the man to hide his face who begins the QZQ dance and then is foot-stuck to the arena? But in this instance the caution of the elders was no more than a formality for Nwibe was such a sensible man that no one could think of him beginning something he was not sure to finish. On that Eke day Nwibe had risen early so as to visit his farm beyond the stream and do some light work before going to the market at midday to drink a horn or two of palm-wine with his peers and perhaps buy that bundle of roofing thatch for the repair of his wives' huts. As for his own hut he had a coup1e of years back settled it finally by changing his thatchroof to zinc. Sooner or later he would do the same for his wives. He could have done Mgboye's hut right away but decided to wait until he could do the two together, or else Udenkwo would set the entire compound on fire. Udenkwo was the junior wife, by three years, but she never let that worry her. Happily Mgboye was a woman of peace who rarely demanded the respect due to her from the other. She would suffer Udenkwo's provoking tongue sometimes for a whole day without offering a word in reply. And when she did reply at all her words were always few and her voice very low. That very morning Udenkwo had accused her of spite and all kinds of wickedness on account of a little dog. "What has a little dog done to you?" she screamed loud enough for half the village to hear. "I ask you, Mgboye, what is the offense of a puppy this early in the day?" "What your puppy did this early in the day," replied Mgboye, "is that he put his shit-mouth into my souppot." "And then?" "And then I smacked him." "You smacked him! Why don't you cover your souppot? Is it easier to hit a dog than cover a pot? Is a small puppy to have more sense than a woman who leaves her soup-pot about . . . ?" "Enough from you, Udenkwo." "It is not enough, Mgboye, it is not enough. If that dog owes you any debt I want to know. Everything I have, even a little dog I bought to eat my infant's excrement keeps you awake at nights. You are a bad woman, Mgboye, you are a very bad woman!" Nwibe had listened to all of this in silence in his hut. He knew from the vigour in Udenkwo's voice that she could go on like this till market-time. So he intervened, in his characteristic manner by calling out to his senior wife. "Mgboye! Let me have peace this early morning!" "Don't you hear all the abuses Udenkwo . . ." "I hear nothing at all from Udenkwo and I want peace in my compound. If Udenkwo is crazy must everybody else go crazy with her? Is one crazy woman not enough in my compound so early in the day?" "The great judge has spoken," sang Udenkwo in a sneering sing-song. "Thank you, great judge. Udenkwo is mad. Udenkwo is always mad, but those of you who are sane let . . ." "Shut your mouth, shameless woman, or a wild beast will lick your eyes for you this morning. When will you learn to keep your badness within this compound instead of shouting it to all Ogbu to hear? I say shut your mouth!" There was silence then except for Udenkwo's infant whose yelling had up till then been swallowed up by the larger noise of the adults. "Don't cry, my father," said Udenkwo to him. "They want to kill your dog, but our people say the man who decides to chase after a chicken, for him is the fall" By the middle of the morning Nwibe had done all the work he had to do on his farm and was on his way again to prepare for market. At the little stream he decided as he always did to wash off the sweat of work. So he put his cloth on a huge boulder by the men's bathing section and waded in. There was nobody else around because of the time of day and because it was market day. But from instinctive modesty he turned to face the forest away from the approaches. The madman watched him for quite a while. Each time he bent down to carry water in cupped hands from the shallow stream to his head and body the madman smiled at his parted behind. And then remembered. This was the same hefty man who brought three others like him and whipped me out of my hut in the AfQ market. He nodded to himself. And he remembered again: this was the same vagabond who descended on me from the lorry in the middle of my highway. He nodded once more. And then he remembered yet again: this was the same fellow who set his children to throw stones at me and make remarks about their mothers' buttocks, not mine. Then he laughed. Nwibe turned sharply round and saw the naked man laughing, the deep grove of the stream amplifying his laughter. Then he stopped as suddenly as he had begun; the merriment vanished from his face. "I have caught you naked," he said. Nwibe ran a hand swiftly down his face to clear his eyes of water. "I say I have caught you naked, with your thing dangling about." "I can see you are hungry for a whipping," said Nwibe with quiet menace in his voice, for a madman is said to be easily scared away by the very mention of a whip. "Wait till I get up there. . . . What are you doing? Drop it at once . . . I say drop it!" The madman had picked up Nwibe's cloth and wrapped it round his own waist. He looked down at himself and began to laugh again. "I will kill you," screamed N wibe as he splashed towards the bank, maddened by anger. "I will whip that madness out of you today!" They ran all the way up the steep and rocky footpath hedged in by the shadowy green forest. A mist gathered and hung over Nwibe's vision as he ran, stumbled, fell, pulled himself up again and stumbled on, shouting and cursing. The other, despite his unaccustomed encumbrance steadily increased his lead, for he was spare and wiry, a thing made for speed. Furthermore, he did not waste his breath shouting and cursing; he just ran. Two girls going down to the stream saw a man running up the slope towards them pursued by a stark-naked madman. They threw down their pots and fled, screaming. When Nwibe emerged into the full glare of the highway he could not see his cloth clearly any more and his chest was on the point of exploding from the fire and torment within. But he kept running. He was only vaguely aware of crowds of people on all sides and he appealed to them tearfully without stopping: "Hold the madman, he's got my cloth!" By this time the man with the cloth was practically lost among the much denser crowds far in front so that the link between him and the naked man was no longer clear. Now Nwibe continually bumped against people's backs and then laid flat a frail old man struggling with a stubborn goat on a leash. "Stop the madman," he shouted hoarsely, his heart tearing to shreds, "he's got my cloth!" Everyone looked at him first in surprise and then less surprise because strange sights are common in a great market. Some of them even laughed. "They've got his cloth he says." "That's a new one I'm sure. He hardly looks mad yet. Doesn't he have people, I wonder." "People are so careless these days. Why can't they keep proper watch over their sick relation, especially on the day of the market?" Farther up the road on the very brink of the marketplace two men from Nwibe's village recognized him and, throwing down the one his long basket of yams, the other his calabash of palm-wine held on a loop, gave desperate chase, to stop him setting foot irrevocably within the occult territory of the powers of the market. But it was in vain. When finally they caught him it was well inside the crowded square. Udenkwo in tears tore off her top-cloth which they draped on him and led him home by the hand. He spoke just once about a madman who took his cloth in the stream. "It is all right," said one of the men in the tone of a father to a crying child. They led and he followed blindly, his heavy chest heaving up and down in silent weeping. Many more people from his village, a few of his in-laws and one or two others from his mother's place had joined the grief-stricken party. One man whispered to another that it was the worst kind of madness, deep and tongue-tied. "May it end ill for him who did this," prayed the other. much." "Can you do nothing at all then, not even to untie his tongue?" "Nothing can be done. They have already embraced him. It is like a man who runs away from the oppression of his fellows to the grove of an alusi and says to him: Take me, oh spirit, I am your osu. No man can touch him thereafter. He is free and yet no power can break his bondage. He is free of men but bonded to a god." The second doctor was not as famous as the first and not so strict. He said the case was bad, very bad indeed, but no one folds his anns because the condition of his child is beyond hope. He must still grope around and do his best. His hearers nodded in eager agreement. And then he muttered into his own inward ear: If doctors were to send away every patient whose cure they were uncertain of, how many of them would eat one meal in a whole week from their practice? Nwibe was cured of his madness. That humble practitioner who did the miracle became overnight the most celebrated mad-doctor of his generation. They called him Sojourner to the Land of the Spirits. Even so it remains true that madness may indeed sometimes depart but never with all his clamorous train. Some of these always remain-the trailers of madness you might call them-to haunt the doorway of the eyes. For how could a man be the same again of whom witnesses from all the lands of Olu and Igbo have once reported that they saw today a fine, hefty man in his prime, stark naked, tearing through the crowds to answer the call of the market-place? Such a man is marked for ever. "Yes, 1 know. It happens that way sometimes. And they are the ones that medicine will not reach. 1 know." Nwibe became a quiet, withdrawn man avoiding whenever he could the boisterous side of the life of his The first medicine-man his relatives consulted refused to take him on, out of some kind of integrity. "I could say yes to you and take your money," he said. "But that is not my way. My powers of cure are known throughout Olu and Igbo but never have 1 professed to bring back to life a man who has sipped the spirit-waters of ani-mmQ. It is the same with a madman who of his own accord delivers himself to the divinities of the market-place. You should have kept better watch over him." "Don't blame us too much," said Nwibe's relative. "When he left home that morning his senses were as complete as yours and mine now. Don't blame us too people. Two years later, before another initiation season, he made a new inquiry about joining the community of titled men in his town. Had they received him perhaps he might have become at least partially restored, but those QZQ men, dignified and polite as ever, deftly steered the conversation away to other matters. Chike's School Days Sarah's last child was a boy, and his birth brought great joy to the house of his father, Amos. The child received three names at his baptism~ohn , Chike, Obiajulu. The last name means "the mind at last is at rest." Anyone hearing this name knew at once that its owner was either an only child or an only son. Chike was an only son. His parents had had five daughters before him. Like his sisters Chike was brought up "in the ways of the white man," which meant the opposite of traditional. Amos had many years before bought a tiny bell with which he summoned his family to prayers and hymn-singing first thing in the morning and last thing at night. This was one of the ways of the white man. Sarah taught her children not to eat in their neighbours' houses because "they offered their food to idols." And thus she set herself against the age-old custom which regarded children as the common responsibility of all so that, no matter what the relationship between parents, their children played together and shared their food. One day a neighbour offered a piece of yam to Chike, who was only four years old. The boy shook his head haughtily and said, "We don't eat heathen food." The neighbour was full of rage, but she controlled herself and only muttered under her breath that even an Om was full of pride nowadays, thanks to the white man. And she was right. In the past an Osu could not raise his shaggy head in the presence of the free-born. He was a slave to one of the many gods of the clan. He was a thing set apart, not to be venerated but to be despised and almost spat on. He could not marry a free-born, and he could not take any of the titles of his clan. When he died, he was buried by his kind in the Bad Bush. Now all that had changed, or had begun to change. So that an Osu child could even look down his no e at a free-born, and talk about heathen food! The white man had indeed accomplished many things. Chike's father was not originally an Osu, but had gone and married an Osu woman in the name of Christianity. It was unheard of for a man to make himself Osu in that way, with his eyes wide open. But then Amos was nothing if not mad. The new religion had gone to his head. It was like palm-wine. Some people drank it and remained ensible. Others lost every sense in their stomach. The only person who supported Amos in his mad marriage venture was Mr. Brown, the white missionary, who lived in a thatch-roofed, red-earth-walled parsonage and was highly respected by the people, not because of his sermons, but because of a dispensary he ran in one of his rooms. Amos had emerged from Mr. Brown's parsonage greatly fortified. A few days later he told his widowed mother, who had recently been converted to Christianity and had taken the name of Elizabeth. The shock nearly killed her. When she recovered, she went down on her knees and begged Amos not to do this thing. But he would not hear; his ears had been nailed up. At last, in desperation, Elizabeth went to consult the diviner. This diviner was a man of great power and wisdom. As he sat on the floor of his hut beating a tortoise shell, a coating of white chalk round his eyes, he saw not only the present, but also what had been and what was to be. He was called ''the man of the four eyes." As soon as old Elizabeth appeared, he cast his stringed cowries and told her what she had come to see him about. "Your son has joined the white man's religion. And you too in your old age when you should know better. And do you wonder that he is stricken with insanity? Those who gather ant-infested faggots must be prepared for the visit of lizards." He cast his cowries a number of times and wrote with a finger on a bowl of sand, and all the while his nwifulu, a talking calabash, chatted to itself. "Shut up!" he roared, and it immediately held its peace. The diviner then muttered a few incantations and rattled off a breathless reel of proverbs that followed one another like the cowries in his magic string. At last he pronounced the cure. The ancestors were angry and must be appeased with a goat. Old Elizabeth performed the rites, but her son remained insane and married an Osu girl whose name was Sarah. Old Elizabeth renounced her new religion and returned to the faith of her people. We have wandered from our main story. But it is important to know how Chike's father became an Osu, because even today when everything is upside down, such a story is very rare. But now to return to Chike who refused heathen food at the tender age of four years, or maybe five. 1\\10 years later he went to the village school. His right hand could now reach across his head to his left ear, which proved that he was old enough to tackle the mysteries of the white man's learning. He was very happy about his new slate and pencil, and especially about his school unifonn of white shirt and brown khaki shorts. But as the first day of the new tenn approached, his young mind dwelt on the many stories about teachers and their canes. And he rememebered the song his elder sisters sang, a song that had a somewhat disquieting refrain: It did not matter to t heir dancing that in the twentieth century Caesar was no longer ruler of the whole world. And sometimes they even sang in English. Chike was very fond of "Ten Green Bottles." They had been taught the words but they only remembered the first and the last lines. The middle was hummed and hie-ed and mumbled: Onye nkuzi ewelu itali piagbusie umuaka. One of the ways an emphasis is laid in Ibo is by exaggeration, so that the teacher in the refrain might not actually have flogged the children to death. But there was no doubt he did flog them. And Chike thought very much about it. Being so young, Chike was sent to what was called the "religious class" where they sang, and sometimes danced, the catechism. He loved the sound of words and he loved rhythm. During the catechism lesson the class fonned a ring to dance the teacher's question. "Who was Caesar?" he might ask, and the song would burst forth with much stamping of feet. Siza bu eze Rome Onye nachi enu uwa dum. Ten grin botr angin on dar war, Ten grin botr angin on dar war, Hm hm hm hm hm Hm, hm hm hm hm hm, An ten grin botr angin on dar war. In this way the first year passed. Chike was promoted to the "Infant School," where work of a more serious nature was undertaken. We need not follow him through the Infant School. It would make a full story in itself. But it was no different from the story of other children. In the Primary School, however, his individual character began to show. He developed a strong hatred for arithmetic. But he loved stories and songs. And he liked particularly the sound of English words, even when they conveyed no meaning at all. Some of them simply IDled him with elation. "Periwinkle" was such a word. He had now forgotten how he learned it or exactly what it was. He had a vague private meaning for it and it was something to do with fairyland. "Constellation" was another. Chike's teacher was fond of long words. He was said to be a very learned man. His favourite pastime was copying out jaw-breaking words from his Chambers' Etymological Dictionary. Only the other day he had raised applause from his class by demolishing a boy's excuse for lateness with unanswerable erudition. He had said: "Procrastination is a lazy man's apology." The teacher's erudition showed itself in every subject he taught. His nature study lessons were memorable. Chike would always remember the lesson on the methods of seed dispersal. According to teacher, there were five methods: by man, by animals, by water, by wind, and by explosive mechanism. Even those pupils who forgot all the other methods remembered "explosive mechanism." Chike was naturally impressed by teacher's explosive vocabulary. But the fairyland quality which words had for him was of a different kind. The first sentences in his New Method R eader were simple enough and yet they filled him with a vague exultation: "Once there was a wizard. He lived in Africa. He went to China to get a lamp. " Chike read it over and over again at home and then made a song of it. It was a meaningless song. "Periwinkles" got into it, and also "Damascus." But it was like a window through which he saw in the distance a strange, magical new world . And he was happy. The Sacrificial Egg Julius Obi sat gazing at his typewriter. The fat Chief Clerk, his boss, was snoring at his table. Outside, the gatekeeper in his green uniform was sleeping at his post. You couldn't blame him; no customer had passed through the gate for nearly a week. There was an empty basket on the giant weighing machine. A few palm-kernels lay desolately in the dust around the machine. Only the flies remained in strength. Julius went to the window that overlooked the great market on the bank of the River Niger. This market, though still called Nkwo, had long spilled over into Eke, Oye, and AfQ with the coming of civilization and the growth of the town into the big palm-oil port. In spite of this encroachment, however, it was still busiest on its original Nkwo day, because the deity who had presided over it from antiquity still cast her spell only on her own day-let men in their greed spill over themselves. It was said that she appeared in the form of an old woman in the centre of the market just before cock-crow and waved her magic fan in the four directions of the earth-in front of her, behind her, to the right and to the left-to draw to the market men and women from distant places. And they came bringing the produce of their lands-palm-oil and kernels, cola nuts, cassava, mats, baskets and earthenware pots; and took home many-coloured cloths, smoked fish, iron pots and plates. These were the forest peoples. The other half of the world who lived by the great rivers came down also-by canoe, bringing yams and fish. Sometimes it was a big canoe with a dozen or more people in it; sometimes it was a lone fisherman and his wife in a small vessel from the swiftflowing Anambara. They moored their canoe on the bank and sold their fish, after much haggling. The woman then walked up the steep banks of the river to the heart of the market to buy salt and oil and, if the sales had been very good, even a length of cloth. And for her children at home she 'bought bean cakes and mai-mai which the Igara women cooked. As evening approached, they took up their paddles again and paddled away, the water shimmering in the sunset and their canoe becoming smaller and smaller in the distance until it was just a dark crescent on the water's face and two dark bodies swaying forwards and backwards in it. Umuru then was the meeting place of the forest people who were called Igbo and the alien river folk whom the Igbo called Olu and beyond whom the world stretched in indefiniteness. Julius Obi was not a native of Umuru. He had come like countless others from some bush village inland. Having passed his Standard Six in a mission school he had come to Umuru to work as a clerk in the offices of the all-powerful European trading company which bought palm-kernels at its own price and cloth and metalware, also at its own price. The offices were situated beside the famous market so that in his first two or three weeks Julius had to learn to work within its huge enveloping hum. Sometimes when the Chief Clerk was away he walked to the window and looked down on the vast anthill activity. Most of these people were not here yesterday, he thought, and yet the market had been just as full. There must be many, many people in the world to be able to fill the market day after day like this. Of course they say not all who came to the great market were real people. Janet's mother, Ma, had said so. "Some of the beautiful young women you see squeezing through the crowds are not people like you or me but mammy-wota who have their town in the depths of the river," she said. "You can always tell them, because they are beautiful with a beauty that is too perfect and too cold. You catch a glimpse of her with the tail of your eye, then you blink and look properly, but she has already vanished in the crowd." Julius thought about these things as he now stood at the window looking down on the silent, empty market. Who would have believed that the great boisterous market could ever be quenched like this? But such was the strength of Kitikpa, the incarnate power of smallpox. Only he could drive away all those people and leave the market to the flies. When Umuru was a little village, there was an agegrade who swept its market-square every Nkwo day. But progress had turned it into a busy, sprawling, crowded and dirty river port, a no-man's-land where strangers outnumbered by far the sons of the soil, who could do nothing about it except shake their heads at this gross perversion of their prayer. For indeed they had prayed-who will blame them-for their town to grow and prosper. And it had grown. But there is good growth and there is bad growth. The belly does not bulge out only with food and drink; it might be the abominable diseru;e which would end by sending its sufferer out of the house even before he was fully dead. The strangers who came to Umuru came for trade and money, not in search of duties to perform, for they had those in plenty back home in their village which was real home. And as if this did not suffice, the young sons and daughters of Umuru soil, encouraged by schools and churches were behaving no better than the strangers. They neglected all their old tasks and kept only the revelries. Such was the state of the town when Kitikpa came to see it and to demand the sacrifice the inhabitants owed the gods of the soil. He came in confident knowledge of the terror he held over the people. He was an evil deity, and boasted it. Lest he be offended those he killed were not killed but decorated, and no one dared weep for them. He put an end to the coming and going between neighbours and between Villages. They said, "Kitikpa is in that village," and immediately it was cut off by its neighbours. Julius was sad and worried because it was almost a week since he had seen Janet, the girl he was going to marry. Ma had explained to him very gently that he should no longer go to see them "until this thing is over, by the power of Jehovah." (Ma was a very devout Christian convert and one reason why she approved of Julius for her only daughter was that he sang in the choir of the CMS church.) "You must keep to your rooms," she had said in hushed tones, for Kitikpa strictly forbade any noise or boisterousness. "You never know whom you might meet on the streets. That family has got it." She lowered her voice even more and pointed surreptitiously at the house across the road whose doorway was barred with a yellow palm-frond. "He has decorated one of them already and the rest were moved away today in a big government Ion),." Janet walked a short way with Julius and stopped; so he stopped too. They seemed to have nothing to say to each other yet they lingered on. Then she said goodnight and he said goodnight. And they shook hands, which was very odd, as though parting for the night were something new and grave. He did not go straight home, because he wanted desperately to cling, even alone, to this strange parting. Being educated he was not afraid of whom he might meet, so he went to the bank of the river and just walked up and down it. He must have been there a long time because he was still there when the wooden gong of the night-mask sounded. He immediately set out for home, half-walking and halfrunning, for night-masks were not a matter of superstition; they were real. They chose the night for their revelry because like the bat's their ugliness was great. In his hurry he stepped on something that broke with a slight liquid explosion. He stopped and peeped down at the footpath. The moon was not up yet but there was a faint light in the sky which showed that it would not be long delayed. In this half-light he saw that he had stepped on an egg offered in sacrifice. Someone oppressed by misfortune had brought the offering to the crossroads in the dusk. And he had stepped on it. There were the usual young palmfronds around it. But Julius saw it differently as a house where the terrible artist was at work. He wiped the sole of his foot on the sandy path and hurried away, carrying another vague worry in his mind. But hurrying was no use now; the fleet-footed mask was already abroad. Perhaps it was impelled to hurry by the threatening imminence of the moon. Its voice rose high and clear in the still night air like a flaming sword. It was yet a long way away, but Julius knew that distances vanished before it. So he made straight for the cocoyam farm beside the road and threw himself on his belly, in the shelter of the broad leaves. He had hardly done this when he heard the rattling staff of the spirit and a thundering stream of esoteric speech. He shook allover. The sounds came bearing down on him, almost pressing his face into the moist earth. And now he could hear the footsteps. It was as if twenty evil men were running together. Panic sweat broke all over him and he was nearly impelled to get up and run. Fortunately he kept a firm hold on himself . . . In no time at all the commotion in the air and on the earth-the thunder and torrential rain, the earthquake and flood-passed and disappeared in the distance on the other side of the road. The next morning at the office, the Chief Clerk, a son of the soil spoke bitterly about last night's provocation of Kitikpa by the headstrong youngsters who had launched the noisy fleet-footed mask in defiance of their elders, who knew that Kitikpa would be enraged, and then . . . The trouble was that the disobedient youths had never yet experienced the power of Kitikpa themselves; they had only heard of it. But soon they would learn. As Julius stood at the window looking out on the emptied market he lived through the terror of that night again. It was barely a week ago but already it seemed like another life, separated from the present by a vast emptiness. This emptiness deepened with every passing day. On this side of it stood Julius, and on the other Ma and Janet whom the dread artist decorated.
<|book_end|>

<|book_start|>
INTRODUCTION An Igbo proverb tells us that a man who does not know where the rain began to beat him cannot say where he dried his body. The rain that beat Africa began four to five hundred years ago, from the discovery of Africa by Europe, through the transatlantic slave trade, to the Berlin Conference of 1885. That controversial gathering of the worlds leading European powers precipitated what we now call the Scramble for Africa, which created new boundaries that did violence to Africas ancient societies and resulted in tension-prone modern states. It took place without African consultation or representation, to say the least. Great Britain was handed the area of West Africa that would later become Nigeria, like a piece of chocolate cake at a birthday party. It was one of the most populous regions on the African continent, with over 250 ethnic groups and distinct languages. The northern part of the country was the seat of several ancient kingdoms, such as the Kanem-Bornuwhich Shehu Usman dan Fodio and his jihadists absorbed into the Muslim Fulani Empire. The Middle Belt of Nigeria was the locus of the glorious Nok Kingdom and its world-renowned terra-cotta sculptures. The southern protectorate was home to some of the regions most sophisticated civilizations. In the west, the Oyo and Ife kingdoms once strode majestically, and in the midwest the incomparable Benin Kingdom elevated artistic distinction to a new level. Across the Niger River in the East, the Calabar and the Nri kingdoms flourished. If the Berlin Conference sealed her fate, then the amalgamation of the southern and northern protectorates inextricably complicated Nigerias destiny. Animists, Muslims, and Christians alike were held together by a delicate, some say artificial, lattice.1 Britains indirect rule was a great success in northern and western Nigeria, where affairs of state within this new dispensation continued as had been the case for centuries, with one exceptionthere was a new sovereign, Great Britain, to whom all vassals pledged fealty and into whose coffers all taxes were paid.2 Indirect rule in Igbo land proved far more challenging to implement. Colonial rule functioned through a newly created and incongruous establishment of warrant chiefsa deeply flawed arrangement that effectively confused and corrupted the Igbo democratic spirit.3 Africas postcolonial disposition is the result of a people who have lost the habit of ruling themselves. We have also had difficulty running the new systems foisted upon us at the dawn of independence by our colonial masters. Because the West has had a long but uneven engagement with the continent, it is imperative that it understand what happened to Africa. It must also play a part in the solution. A meaningful solution will require the goodwill and concerted efforts on the part of all those who share the weight of Africas historical burden. Most members of my generation, who were born before Nigerias independence, remember a time when things were very different. Nigeria was once a land of great hope and progress, a nation with immense resources at its disposalnatural resources, yes, but even more so, human resources. But the Biafran war changed the course of Nigeria. In my view it was a cataclysmic experience that changed the history of Africa.  There is some connection between the particular distress of war, the particular tension of war, and the kind of literary response it inspires. I chose to express myself in that period through poetry, as opposed to other genres.4 My Biafran poems and other poetry are collected in two volumesBeware, Soul Brother, Poems (which was published as Christmas in Biafra and Other Poems in America) in 1971 and Collected Poems in 2004. As a group these poems tell the story of Biafras struggle and suffering. I have made the conscious choice to juxtapose poetry and prose in this book to tell complementary stories, in two art forms. It is for the sake of the future of Nigeria, for our children and grandchildren, that I feel it is important to tell Nigerias story, Biafras story, our story, my story. I begin this story with my own coming of age in an earlier and, in some respects, a more innocent time. I do this both to bring readers unfamiliar with this landscape into it at a human level and to be open about some of the sources of my own perspective. Pioneers of a New Frontier My father was born in the last third of the nineteenth century, an era of great cultural, economic, and religious upheaval in Igbo land. His mother had died in her second childbirth, and his father, Achebe, a refugee from a bitter civil war, did not long survive his wife. And so my father was raised by his maternal uncle, Udoh. It was this maternal uncle, as fate would have it, who received in his compound the first party of English clergy in his town. The new arrivals, missionaries of a new religion, Christianity, had already conquered the Yoruba heartland and were expanding their footprint in Igbo land and the rest of southern Nigeria with their potent, irresistible tonic of evangelism and education. A story is told of how Udoh, a very generous and tolerant man, finally asked his visitors to move to a public playground on account of their singing, which he considered too dismal for a living mans compound. But he did not discourage his young nephew from associating with the singers.1 My father was an early Christian convert and a good student. By 1904 he was deemed to have received enough education at St. Pauls Teachers College in Awka to be employed as a teacher and an evangelist in the Anglican Mission. He was a brilliant man, who deeply valued education and read a great dealmainly the Bible and religious books, periodicals, and almanacs from the Church Mission Society. My mother, Janet Anaenechi Iloegbunam, was an extraordinary woman. As a student of the legendary missionary and evangelist Miss Edith Warner she received a primary school education, which was a phenomenal feat at the time, especially for a woman. My mother joined my father on his travels through much of Igbo land to spread the gospel. My parents were among the first of their people to successfully integrate traditional values with the education and new religion brought by the Europeans. I still marvel at how wholeheartedly they embraced strangers from thousands of miles away, with their different customs and beliefs. It is from these two outstanding and courageous individuals that my five siblingsFrank, Zinobia, John, Augustine, and Graceand I got our deep love for education and the pursuit of knowledge. The Magical Years On November 16, 1930, in Nnobi, near my hometown of Ogidi, providence ushered me into a world at a cultural crossroads. By then, a long-standing clash of Western and African civilizations had generated deep conversations and struggles between their respective languages, religions, and cultures. Crossroads possess a certain dangerous potency. Anyone born there must wrestle with their multiheaded spirits and return to his or her people with the boon of prophetic vision, or accept, as I have, lifes interminable mysteries. My initiation into the complicated world of Ndi Igbo1 was at the hands of my mother and my older sister, Zinobia, who furnished me with a number of wonderful stories from our ancient Igbo tradition. The tales were steeped in intrigue, spiced with oral acrobatics and song, but always resolute in their moral message. My favorite stories starred the tortoise mbe, and celebrated his mischievous escapades. As a child, sitting quietly, mesmerized, story time took on a whole new world of meaning and importance. I realize, reminiscing about these events, that it is little wonder I decided to become a storyteller. Later in my literary career I traveled back to the magic of the storytelling of my youth to write my childrens books: How the Leopard Got His Claws, Chike and the River, The Drum: A Childrens Story, and The Flute.  When I think about my mother the first thing that comes to my mind is how clearly the description the strong, silent type fit her. Mother was neither talkative nor timid but seemed to exist on several planesoften quietly escaping into the inner casements of her mind, where she engaged in deep, reflective thought. It was from her that I learned to appreciate the power and solace in silence. Mothers education prepared her for leadership, and she distinguished herself in the church and as the head of a group of expatriate women from the ancient town of Awka who were married in Ogidi. She always treated others with respect and exuded a calm self-confidence. Mother brought a remarkable, understated elegance to every activity in which she engaged. She had a particularly attractive way of making sure she got her point across without being overbearing or intimidating. It is her peaceful determination to tackle barriers in her world that nailed down a very important element of my developmentthe willingness to bring about change gently. We were Christians, though the interreligious struggle was still evident in our time. There were occasions when one would suddenly realize there were sides, and one was on one or another. Perhaps the most important event that illustrates this was what has come to be known in my family as the Kola nut incident. The story came out that a neighbor who was a relative of mine and someone the Christians would refer to as a heathen, was passing on the road one day and watched quietly as my mother pulled down a small Kola nut branch from a tree in her compound and picked a ripe fruit. Now one often forgot that there were taboos about picking Kola nuts. Traditionally no one was allowed to pick them from the tree; they were supposed to ripen, fall, and then be collected from the ground, and by mennot by women. The Kola nut was a sacred fruit and had a very distinct and distinguished role to play in Igbo life and culture. The neighbor reported this incident to the menfolk, who then exaggerated the insult to our traditions. But Mother insisted that she had every right to pick the fruit, particularly from a tree in her own compound. I did not think up to that moment that my mother was a fighter. There was pressure to punish my mother, though it did not go anywhere in the end. Looking back, one can appreciate the fact that she had won a battle for Christianity, womens rights, and freedom. The most powerful memories of my father are the ones of him working as a catechist and a teacher. He read constantly and had a small library. My father also had a number of collages and maps hanging on the walls, and books that he encouraged his children to read. He would often walk us through the house telling stories linked to each prized possession. It was from him that I was exposed to the magic in the mere title of William Shakespeares A Midsummer Nights Dream and to an Igbo translation of John Bunyans The Pilgrims Progress. The Bible played an important role in my education. My parents often read passages out loud to us during prayer time and encouraged us, when we were all able, to read and memorize several passages. Sunday school continued this tradition of Christian evangelical education, this time with several other children from the village. Education was so important to my father that he often would sponsor a bright child from an underprivileged background, reminding us that he too, as an orphan, had received providences benefaction. The center of our familys activities was St. Philips Church, Ogidi, a large Gothic-style parish church that my father helped establish. It was constructed on an impressive, open ilo, or piece of open grass, on the outskirts of Ogidi. It was an imposing structure for its time, built with wood, cement, mud, and stone. Local lore holds that my father took part in the building of the church from its foundations. My father also helped conduct Sunday service, translate sermons into Igbo, and arrange the sanctuary and vestry. I remember waking up early to help out, carrying his bag for him as we set out at cock crow for the parish church. Eucharist on Sundays often lasted more than two hours. For those who were not asleep by the end of the proceedings, the fire and brimstone sermons from the pulpit made attendance worthwhile. There was an occasional outburst of uncontrollable laughter, when the rector, an Englishman, enthusiastically drank all the remaining wine at the end of communion, wiping his mouth with the back of his hand. A crowd favorite was the inaccurate translations of Igbo words into English, such as the word ike, which is an Igbo word that can mean strength or buttocks depending on the skill or mischief of the translator! I can say that my whole artistic career was probably sparked by this tension between the Christian religion of my parents, which we followed in our home, and the retreating, older religion of my ancestors, which fortunately for me was still active outside my home. I still had access to a number of relatives who had not converted to Christianity and were called heathens by the new converts. When my parents were not watching I would often sneak off in the evenings to visit some of these relatives. They seemed so very content in their traditional way of life and worship. Why would they refuse to become Christians, like everyone else around them? I was intent on finding out. My great-uncle, Udoh Osinyi, was able to bestride both worlds with great comfort. He held one of the highest titles in all of Igbo landozo. I was very interested in my great-uncles religion, and talking to him was an enriching experience. I wouldnt give up anything for that, including my own narrow, if you like, Christian background. In Igbo cosmology there are many gods. A person could be in good stead with one god and not the otherogwugwu could kill a person despite an excellent relationship with udo. As a young person that sort of complexity meant little to me. A later understanding would reveal the humility of the traditional religion with greater clarity. Igbo sayings and proverbs are far more valuable to me as a human being in understanding the complexity of the world than the doctrinaire, self-righteous strain of the Christian faith I was taught. This other religion is also far more artistically satisfying to me. However, as a catechists son I had to suppress this interest in our traditions to some extent, at least the religious component. We were church people after all, helping the local church spread Christianity. The relationship between my father and his uncle Udoh was instructive to me. There was something deep and mystical about it, judging from the reverence I heard in my fathers voice whenever he spoke about his old uncle. My father was a man of few words, and I have always regretted that I did not ask him more questions. But he took pains to tell me what he thought I needed to know. He told me, for instance, in a rather oblique way of his one attempt to convert his uncle Udoh. It must have been in my fathers youthful, heady, proselytizing days! His uncle pointed to the awesome row of insignia of his three titlesichi ozo, ido idemili, ime omaalor. What shall I do to these? he asked my father. It was an awesome question. He had essentially asked: What do I do to who I am? What do I do to history? An orphan child born into adversity, heir to the commotions, barbarities, and rampant upheavals of a continent in disarrayit was not at all surprising that my father would welcome the remedy proffered by diviners and interpreters of a new word of God. But my great-uncle, a leader in his community, a moral, openminded man, a prosperous man who had prepared such a great feast when he took the ozo title that his people gave him a praise name for itwas he to throw all that away because some strangers from afar had said so? At first glance it seemed to me that my father, a deeply religious man, was not tolerant of our ancient traditions and religion. As he got older, however, I noticed that he became more openly accommodating of the old ways of doing things. By this time he had developed quite a reputation as a pious, disciplined, honest catechist. He was widely known as onye nkuzi (the teacher), and the villagers found him very trustworthy. Strangers would often drop off valuables at our house for Fathers safe-keeping. Those twomy father and his uncleformed the dialectic that I inherited. Udoh stood fast in what he knew, but he also left room for my father to seek other answers. The answer my father found in the Christian faith solved many problems, but by no means all. As a young person my perspective of the world benefited, I think, from this dichotomy. I wasnt questioning in an intellectual way which way was right, or better. I was simply more interested in exploring the essence, the meaning, the worldview of both religions. By approaching the issues of tradition, culture, literature, and language of our ancient civilization in that manner, without judging but scrutinizing, a treasure trove of discovery was opened up to me. I often had periods of oscillating faith as I grew older, periods of doubt, when I quietly pondered, and deeply questioned, the absolutist teachings or the interpretations of religion. I struggled with the certitude of ChristianityI am the Way, the Truth and the Lifenot its accuracy, because as a writer one understands that there should be such latitude, but the desolation, the acerbity of its meaning, the lack of options for the outsider, the other. I believe that this question has subconsciously deeply influenced my writing. This is not peculiar or particularly unique, as many writers, from Du Bois to Camus, Sartre and Baldwin to Morrison, have also struggled with this conundrum of the outsider, the other, in other ways, in their respective locales. My father had a lot of praise for the missionaries and their message, and so do I. I am a prime beneficiary of the education that the missionaries made a major component of their enterprise. But I have also learned a little more skepticism about them than my father had any need for. Does it matter, I ask myself, that centuries before European Christians sailed down to us in ships to deliver the Gospel and save us from darkness, other European Christians, also sailing in ships, delivered us to the transatlantic slave trade and unleashed darkness in our world? Every generation must recognize and embrace the task it is peculiarly designed by history and by providence to perform. From where I stand now I can see the enormous value of my great-uncle, Udoh Osinyi, and his example of fidelity. I also salute my father, Isaiah Achebe, for the thirty-five years he served as a Christian evangelist and for all the benefits his work, and the work of others like him, brought to our people. My fathers great gift to me was his love of education and his recognition that whether we look at one human family or we look at human society in general, growth can come only incrementally. A Primary Exposure I began my formal education at St. Philips Central School, in 1936 or thereabout. The school had pupils from Ogidi and the surrounding towns. Most who attended classes there had to walk alone several miles every day to get to school. But things were simpler and safer in those days, and there was never a story of child abductions or any unsavory incidents that I can recall. I enjoyed school a great deal and was a hardworking pupil. I remember looking forward excitedly to new lessons and information from our teachers. Occasionally we received instruction from individuals who were not on the staff of St. Philips. One particular, humorous event stands out: On a hot and humid day during the wet season our geography teacher decided to move our entire class outside to the cool shade of a large mango tree. After setting up the blackboard he proceeded to give the class a lesson on the geography of Great Britain. The village madman came by, and after standing and listening to the teachers lesson for a short while, walked up to him, snatched the chalk from his hand, wiped the blackboard, and proceeded to give us an extended lesson on Ogidi, my hometown. Amazingly, the teacher let all this take place without incident. Looking back, it is instructive, in my estimation, that it was a so-called madman whose clarity of perspective first identified the incongruity of our situation: that the pupils would benefit not only from a colonial education but also by instruction about their own history and civilization.  The headmaster of St. Philips Central School was a colorful, extraordinary Igbo manJonathan Obimdike Okongwu. He was also known as: Ara eme ya eme na uno akwukwo Okongwu or Ara eme ya eme, for short.1 He was one of a handful of Nigerians who had attained the distinction of headmaster of an elementary school. His reputation as a disciplinarian sent chills down the spines of all pupils throughout the Eastern Region. St. Philips school lore holds that he once spanked every pupil in every class in each form of the entire school in one day and continued the very next day where he left off!2 Okongwus unorthodox methods produced top scores on exams, which placed his students in the best boarding schools throughout West Africa, and made him one of the most sought after headmasters in the entire region.3 Okongwu was transferred to St. Michaels School, Aba, a well-regarded school in one of the largest commercial cities in eastern Nigeria. Chike Momah and Dr. Francis Egbuonu, who later became students at Government College, Umuahia, completed their elementary school education there. My wife, Christie Okoli, for a brief period, also attended that school. Christie recalls being the only one in her class to evade Mr. Okongwus cane during a spelling lesson. The word that produced a score of sore bottoms was because. For every word missed the pupil was rewarded with a spanking. The majority of the pupils came up with becos, becus, or becoz. They never forgot how to spell because ever again. Okongwu was a pillar of the Igbo community for his time. He was extensively admired for his achievements in education. It is difficult to convey just how important teachers like Okongwu, who were seriously committed to their work, were to the Igbo community, particularly as that is no longer the case today. Education, the white mans knowledge, was a collective aspiration of the entire community. It was the path to individual and family success, and headmaster Okongwu and others like him held the proverbial keys to the kingdom. Okongwu was a generous man and sponsored a number of children in various schools in Nigeria and abroad. There is a well-known story of how he sent one of his nephews to America to study. He clearly had great expectations for his nephew. In those days, men like Okongwu, who had the means, sent family members abroad to advance their education with the hope that they would return and improve the standard of living of their family and community. Apparently this nephew did quite well and earned his PhD. Sadly, just before he returned to Nigeria, he became quite ill and died. Okongwu was devastated.4 The last time I saw Okongwu was at the train station in Enugu, the capital of the Eastern Region. He came there to see his son Sonny Chu Okongwu off to Government College, Umuahia. He was standing, leaning on the railing with his right hand holding on to the bars. He spotted me from a distance and called me over, introduced me to his son, and asked me to take care of Sonny at Government College. It struck me that the senior Okongwu appeared unhappy. The loss of his nephew clearly had taken a lot out of him. Leaving Home For a brief period I spent some time living with my older brother John, who was working at Central School, Nekede, as a teacher. My father had wanted John to follow in his footsteps and become a teacher too. John was a gifted student and successfully fulfilled that dream. It was John who, quite wisely, thought my own education would be enhanced if I lived with him in a school environment. So I packed up my few belongings and set out with my older brother to Nekede, near the present capital of Imo state, Owerri, about forty-three miles from my ancestral home of Ogidi. That was the first year I spent away from my parents, and at the time Nekede seemed like a distant country. John enrolled me in Central School, where I prepared for my entrance examination into Government College. The regional center for the exam was St. Michaels School, and John helped me make the trip from Nekede to Aba. Before I arrived Okongwu apparently announced to the students of St. Michaels, in Igbo: Onwe nwa onye Ogidi ana akpo Albert Achebe, na akwadobe inene akwukwo-a; oga ama unu nmili. (The loose translation is: There is a young man called Albert Achebe from Ogidi, who is coming to take the entrance examination with the students in this school. . . . [H]e will beat all of you in all subjects in the examination.1) This, clearly, did not endear me to my fellow pupils at St. Michaels but piqued the interest of future longtime friends, like the brilliant Chike Momah. Afterward I returned to Nekede for the remainder of the school year. Nekede was a treasure trove of Igbo culture. Our ancient traditions continued to fascinate me, and I sought an alternative education outside the classroom, from the local villagers. The old men in Nekede spoke respectfully about the Otamiri River and the chief deity for which it is named. The Otamiri deity is a female who, according to legend, purified the land of evil and would claim the lives of interlopers who wandered into the area for mischief. It was said that no one had ever drowned in her waters unless they had committed evil deeds or contemplated diabolical acts. It was in Nekede that I was introduced to mbari and the sophistication of Igbo phenomenological thought. The Owerri Igbo, who lived near Owerri township, saw mbari as art engaged in the process and celebration of life. A mud house was often built with decorated walls and crowned with either corrugated metal or a thatch roof made of intricately woven palm leaves and spines. Inside, center stage on an elevated mud platform, an observer would find life-size sculptures of the constituent parts of the Owerri Igbo world: Alusideities such as Otamiri and Ani, the earth goddess; and men, women, children, soldiers, animals, crops, and foreigners (mainly Europeans), all seated. The inclusion of the Europeans, a great tribute to the virtues of African tolerance and accommodation, was an example of the positive acknowledgment of strangers who had ventured into their midst. There would also be depictions from ancient mythology, as well as scourges, diseases, and other unpleasant things. The purpose of this art form was to invoke protection from the gods for the people through the celebration of the world these villagers lived inin other words, through art as celebration.2 The Formative Years at Umuahia and Ibadan It was not long after my foray into the metaphysical world of the Owerri Igbo that I was to leave my traditional classroom in the forests of Nekede for the second stage of my formal education, secondary school. There is a certain sense of mystery that I feel when I look back to those times, because things we encounter in life that leave the greatest impressions on us are usually not clear. My elder brother John was a very brilliant man. I still say he was the most brilliant of all of us. He was very eloquent, and he would correct my spoken English. I often wondered about John. . . . How did he gain such control of the English language? John had not been to university but had received a secondary school education at Dennis Memorial Grammar School (DMGS) in Onitsha. All my brothers attended this legendary school, which had been built by the Church Mission SocietyFrank had attended, John went there, and it was where Augustine was to go. The school was very imposing, with its red earthbrick, limestone-and-wood colonial architecture accentuated by Doric columns, and cathedral-height roofs. And their uniformthe dark red shirt, pants, and cap was very impressive. DMGS was the place. In 1944, I took a national entrance examination for the British public schools of the day, and I also was admitted to Dennis Memorial Grammar School and Government College, Umuahia. Now when John was told that I had been admitted to both Umuahia and his alma mater, with full scholarships to both, he suggested I go to Umuahia. Though Umuahias location was very remote, its status as a government college, set up by the colonial government, reassured my parents. Following a period of deliberation and debate, the consensus in my family was that I go to this fairly new school in faraway Umuahia, even though we had no relatives there. I also privately wished to go to Government College, Umuahia, because I wanted to do something different from my brothers. Umuahia, a new elite boarding school established in 1929, was rapidly developing a reputation as the Eton of the East, and I fancied receiving an education akin to the royals of England! The Anglican Protestants of the Church Mission Society, as well as the Methodists, Baptists, and Roman Catholics, had built missionary schools throughout the South and Middle Belt of Nigeria. These new government collegesexemplified by Government College, Umuahia, and Government College, Ibadanwere built to continue the tradition of educational excellence established by even older secondary schools, Kings College and Queens College, both in Lagos. Between these four schoolsKings, Queens, Umuahia, and Ibadanwe had some of the very best secondary schools in the British Empire. As a group, these schools were better endowed financially, had excellent amenities, and were staffed with first-rate teachers, custodians, instructors, cooks, and librarians. Of course today, under Nigerian control, these schools have fallen into disrepair, and are nothing like they were in their heyday. Shortly after taking the national entrance examination I received a letter in the mail addressed to me explaining that I was under consideration for admission to Umuahia. That had to be the first letter I had ever received in my life. I traveled to Umuahia to be interviewed by a former principal, a very tall and large manI believe his name was Mr. Thorp. My interviewer first asked why I did not reply to the letter he wrote me offering me admission. I said I did not know that I was supposed to reply, and he picked up a copy of the letter and read, Please acknowledge receipt. I did not know the meaning of that phrase, and I said to myself, Well, I am not getting in at this point. But after a little more conversation he gave me admission to his school. As the first day of school approached I was overtaken by a sense of excitement and trepidation. I had never been to Umuahia before my interview; in fact, I did not know of anyone who had been to Umuahia. I was to travel first by lorry to Enugu, and then by train to Umuahia. I arrived at Umuahia railway station alone. A man and his son approached me. The man asked me whether I was going to Umudike, the village where the secondary school was located, and I replied Yes, sah. He was going there too, with his son. They had hired two bicycles, and he suggested I ride with them. I carried his son, who was considerably smaller than I, on the handlebars of the bicycle to Umudike, which was about three and a half miles from the railway station. As we sped off, I kept thanking this man for the help. I was completely surprised at the hospitality and warmth that greeted me on my first day in school. His son became a friend, naturally, because he was the first Umuahian I had met. Later that semester I would discover that this lad, who would become a renowned physician, Dr. Francis Egbuonu, had come to Umuahia from St. Michaels School, Aba. It was, coincidentally, the very same school that another very close friend of mine, Chike Momah, had attended. THE UMUAHIA EXPERIENCE Government College, Umuahia, was built on a sprawling, parklike campus at the fringes of a tropical forest. The grounds were dotted with large evergreen trees on well-maintained lawns and crisscrossed by hand-crafted stone pathways that were bordered by manicured hedges. The buildingswood-framed brick-andstucco bungalows surrounded by wide verandaswere adorned with shuttered windows and crowned with large metal roofs. The vaulted-ceiling design also enhanced ventilation and tempered the tropical heat. Most of the structures rested on elevated foundations or stiltsto protect them from floods and to keep termites, wild animals, serpents, and rodents out. There were three dormitories at Umuahiathe Niger, Nile, and School houses. I was assigned to Niger house and once there unpacked my few belongings in my dormitory locker. In my time the school had about two hundred students, and our lives were strictly regimented, with literally every hour slated for an activity. One of the most thrilling peculiarities of the Umuahia experience was the culture of playing cricket. Not all secondary schools in the area played the game; soccer was far more commonplace. Cricket matches were often organized between: Government College, Umuahia; Kings College, Lagos; Government College, Ibadan; and a few other elite secondary schools. Umuahia had a huge cricket field, which had a beautiful grass lawn and a clear sand pitch area with wooden wickets. It was cared for almost more carefully than grass anywhere else in the school. In the afternoons, cricket matches were packed, and the bleachers and grandstands had scarcely an empty spot. Cricket was not a game that I knew anything about before coming to Umuahia. Over time I began to appreciate that this was a very important global sport, and that it was very popular in literally every part of the British Empire. The schoolmasters referred to the game as one for gentlemen and made sure Umuahia athletes played it properlydressed in immaculate white shirts and trousers, gloves, knee-high pads, and helmets. I was not known for my athletic ability, but Chike Momah and Christopher Okigbo were particularly good batsmen and bowlers of the sport. Christopher Okigbo was a very extraordinary person. He was two years below me, but Christopher was not one to allow two years to get in his way. He quickly became one of my closest friends. He was born in Ojoto, in Anambra state, and came from a highly talented family, part of the so-called Okigbo trio of intellectual giants that included his older brother, the late legendary economist Dr. Pius Okigbo, and their cousin Professor Bede Okigbo, the renowned agronomist.1 Christopher was just somebody you could not ignore or suppress. He struck people because he was so energetic, and so fearless. He was somebody who would walk into a room, sit down, and start learning to play the school piano without any prior exposure. He had an innate understanding of what was required to play the instrument without the regimented, torturous, orthodox lessons. Christopher was a talented artist and a sports hero, and he had a keen mind that won him the admiration of many of the British schoolmasters. He quickly became very popular throughout Umuahia. His reputation for mischievous exploits preceded him. I think the first time he got the attention of the entire school was when the principal, William Simpson, decided that there was a lot of food waste coming from the kitchen; in other words, it seemed we were being given too much food to eat! Simpson decided to give food not according to ones academic yearthe pupils in the higher classes were given more food than those in the junior classes. Simpson felt that this practice was not a very good idea, and that it led to a waste of food. A better arrangement, he thought, was for people to be given food according to their weight. Before we knew what was happening, Christopher, who was slightly built, had talked with the dining prefect, and we noticed that he was now in the food equivalent of heavyweights, receiving more food than his classmates! There was a strong culture of meritocracy and a very high quality of instruction at Umuahia. I quickly noticed that there were very bright boys in my class, yet there was a sense of friendly competition that pervaded our academic life. I made friends gradually at school, at first mainly with pupils I met in the dormitory, then with a number of others in the classroom, through partnerships that the class master set up for assignments and projects. Benjamin Uzochukwu became one of my closest friends at the beginning of the first semester; he later qualified as an engineer, after studying in Great Britain, and became the director of the Federal Department of Public Works in Lagos. Ekpo Etien Inyang was another close friend. He was one of my most brilliant classmateshe became a physicianbut unfortunately he later committed suicide. We had very different backgrounds, especially in terms of religion. When he arrived at Umuahia, the school officials discovered that he had not been baptized. Most of us did not ask fellow pupils whether they were baptized or not; one just assumed that if you were a Christian you would have been. But Inyangs father was not a particularly religious person. So when he became an upperclassman Inyang decided to be baptized, and after subjecting himself to the religion classes and preparation that were required, he asked me to be his godfather. So I had a godson who was the same age as me. That was quite an extraordinarily moving gesture on his part, to ask me to step in on his behalf in this capacity. Six of us, including Inyang and me, were promoted to the second-year from the first-year class during our second term at Umuahia. Students with a record of excellent work and who were the best performers in their respective years were combined into a larger second-year class. It was an honor, but it also meant that I began to see a large majority of my contemporaries from my first-year class less often, including my close friends Ben Uzochukwu and Chike Momah. English was the language of instruction at Government College, Umuahia. It was at Umuahia that I first truly understood the power and importance of that unifying language. The schoolmasters, well aware that Nigeria had over 250 ethnic groups, had very carefully enrolled students from every nook and cranny of the nation, where possible. While African languages and writing should be developed, nurtured, and preserved, how else, I would wonder later, would I have been able to communicate with so many boys from different parts of the country and ethnic groups, speaking different languages, had we not been taught one language? Many of our teachers at the time were alumni from Cambridge, the University of London, and other major British institutions of higher learning. They included A. P. L. Slater, who was fondly called Apples by his close associates and a few of us who were his former students. Shortly after I left Umuahia, the duo R. H. Stone, a biology instructor, and A. B. Cozens, a onetime principal of the college, arrived. Together Stone and Cozens published a very famous biology textbook called Biology for Tropical Schools that was used throughout Africa and beyond. It was at Umuahia that I continued the introduction to the work of William Shakespeare that my father had first made possible, as well as to Booker T. Washingtons Up from Slavery, Swifts Gullivers Travels, Dickenss David Copperfield, and Stevensons Treasure Island. We were blessed to have had energetic, egalitarian principals such as the Reverend Robert Fisher and W. C. Simpson, who created and encouraged, respectively, the textbook acta time between 4:00 P.M. and 6:00 P.M. when all textbooks had to be put away and novels picked up and read. Reading these books was a transforming experience, and I have written elsewhere about the influence Umuahia had in educating many of the pioneers of modern African literatureVincent Chukwuemeka Ike, Christopher Okigbo, Elechi Amadi, I. N. C Aniebo, Chike Momah, Gabriel Okara, and later Ken Saro-Wiwa. Less often stated is the role the school played in producing leaders in the fine arts, such as Ben Enwonwu, and politics, such as Jaja Wachukwu, Nigerias first speaker of the House of Representatives and later ambassador to the United Nations. Umuahia turned out other stars, such as Okoi Arikpo, Dr. E. M. L. Endeley, and N. U. Akpan. The school also produced respected African intellectuals such as: the agronomist Professor Bede Okigbo; the physician and First Republic Minister of Health J. O. J. Okezie; Chu Okongwu, a former minister of finance; Kelsey Harrison, a renowned professor of obstetrics; and musician and professor Laz Ekwueme, among others. We went through the designated courses in secondary school, and the last examination that we took was the Cambridge School Certificate exam. There were four classifications of grades: A for distinction, C for credit, P for pass, and F for fail. Most pupils at Umuahia passed all their subjects. I passed my school certificate exam with five distinctions and one credit. Inyang passed with six distinctions and one credit. I narrowly graduated top of the class only because the distinctions that I got were higher in the courses that I took despite the fact that Inyang had more As in more courses. Whatever the case, I held Mr. Inyang in great esteem, especially as he had an A in literature while I had a credit. As I was completing my secondary school education at Government College, Umuahia, the colonial government announced that it was predisposed to building a University College in West Africa. There was some kind of competition would it be in the Gold Coast (present-day Ghana) or in Nigeria? So a highpowered commission under Walter Elliott was sent to survey the situation on the ground. Such was the reputation of Government College, Umuahia, that the commission paid us a visit and spent a whole weekend at our school. Most of them came to chapel service on Sunday morning, but Julian Huxley, the biologist, roamed our extensive grounds, watching exotic birds with binoculars. The Elliott Commission report led to the foundation of Nigerias first university institution: a university college at Ibadan in a special relationship with London. I finished secondary school and literally walked into University College, Ibadan! Well, maybe not walked in. There was a nationwide examination, and I came in first or second in the country. I won what was called a major scholarship.2 I grew up at a time when the colonial educational infrastructure celebrated hard work and high achievement, and so did our families and communities. Government College, Umuahia, was so proud of my work that they put up a big sign announcing my performance in the national entrance examination. That notice stayed on the wall for years. My family was very pleased with my school performance, from the end of primary school through to this time. No matter that I was not known for my athletic ability; they encouraged me to read voraciously, taking great pleasure in my nickname: Dictionary. A very distinguished member of the colonial educational systema British gentlemanwho was also the chairman of some important colonial council, heard about my entrance examination result and came to our house to greet me. Now, I had never encountered such a thing before. Surely people of that distinction did not call on children? But here was this man, who was a very important person in the British educational system, who thought that my work deserved encouragement, recognition, and a visit from him. So clearly I had a good beginning. As a young man, surrounded by all this excitement, it seemed as if the British were planning surprises for me at every turn, including the construction of a new university! It is, of course, only a joke, but I am sure many of my colleagues shared similar feelings. Here we were, a whole generation of students who really could not have had any clear idea of going to university until these events began to unfold. It was a remarkable groupChike Momah, Flora Nwapa, Mabel Segun, Ben Obumselu, Emmanuel Obiechina, Kelsey Harrison, Gamaliel Onosode, Wande Abimbola, Iya Abubakar, Adiele Afigbo, Igwe Aja-Nwachukwu, Theophilus Adeleke Akinyele, Grace Alele Williams, Mohammed Bello, Elechi Amadi. A bit later Wole Soyinka, J. P. Clark, Oluwokayo Oshuntokun, M. J. C. Echeruo, Christopher Okigbo, Ayo Bamgbose, Christine Okoli (my future wife), Emeka Anyaoku, Chukwuemeka Ike, Abiola Irele, Zulu Sofola, and several others. These young men and women came from all over the countryfrom elite secondary schools modeled on the public schools of EnglandGovernment College, Umuahia, Dennis Memorial Grammar School, Government College, Ibadan, and Abeokuta, Kings College, Lagos, and Queens College, Lagos. THE IBADAN EXPERIENCE Umuahia had a large contingent of students admitted to University College, Ibadan, with a number of students winning at least minor scholarships. I received my scholarship to study medicine at Ibadan. I wanted to be in the arts but felt pressure to choose medicine instead. After a year of work I changed to English, history, and theology, but by so doing I lost the bursary and was left with the prospect of paying tuition. I remember what the dean of the Faculty of Arts, Professor E. A. Cadle, said to me when I went to ask to be moved from the sciences to the arts: in order to get into the arts I had to have taken a school certificate exam in Latin, which was not taught at Umuahia. I was faced with a difficult dilemma and spent some time thinking about the ramifications of taking extra courses in Latin. But providence had other plans. Soon after my conversation with Professor Cadle an announcement came through from the University of London, our parent institution, indicating that it was dropping the Latin requirement for admission into the Faculty of Arts. The University of London argued that the native languages of students from the British Commonwealth could stand in for the Latin requirement. I was elated. I went back and asked Professor Cadle for admission into the Arts Faculty. He brought out my file and told me that I was admitted on the basis of my performance in physics and chemistry. He wanted reassurance from me that I would be able to make such a fundamental shift in academic focus and maintain good grades. After a little more conversation, he admitted me to study English, history, and theology, and I moved from medicine to the Arts Faculty. My older brother Augustine Achebe, an engineer by training, had returned from his studies in England and had landed a good job. On learning that I had lost my bursary, Augustine gave me money he had saved up for his annual leave so that I could pay the university tuition and continue my studies, which I did, very pleasantly. After graduation I did not have to worry about where I would go next. The system was so well organized that as we left university most of us were instantly absorbed into civil service, academia, business, or industry. We trustedI did, anywaythe country and its rulers to provide this preparatory education and then a job to serve my nation. I was not disappointed. I went home to my village at the end of the holiday and visited a secondary school within my district, called the Merchants of Light, in Oba, near Ogidi. I asked the principal to give me a job as an English teacher. And he did! It helped that my colleague J. O. C. Ezeilo had completed a short tenure at the same school and recommended it to me. Ezeilo is often described as Nigerias leading mathematician, alongside Chike Obi. Ezeilo graduated from University of London in 1953, with a first class honors in mathematics, an amazing feat by any measure, and particularly extraordinary for the time. He would go on to receive his PhD from Queens College, University of Cambridge, in 1958, and then rise rapidly through the Nigerian academic ranks to become vice chancellor of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, and several other Nigerian institutions of higher learning.3 Meeting Christie and Her Family The school building at Merchants of Light was in disrepair and had a very small library. I would often encourage my students to read by bringing in a copy of the newspaper or by making a few more books from my own library available to them. Like most young people, they were enthusiastic and interested pupils. I spent about four months at this job. It was known to all that this would be a temporary position, what the Americans call a summer job, because I had my eyes farther afield. A few months later, in 1954, I was notified of a job opening at what was then called the Nigerian Broadcasting Service (NBS) in Enugu. I was offered a choice by the search committee of coming to Enugu to interview or having them come to me. I remember feeling quite entitled by this choice and proceeded to enjoy the privilege by asking them to come to me, which they did. The team of mainly Britons left to return to Enugu after an hour or so of interview questions. About a week or so later I received a letter in the mail offering me a job, so I moved to Enugu. I enjoyed my stint at the broadcasting house. Promotions came rapidly, and within a very short period of time I had become the controller of the Nigerian Broadcasting Service, Eastern Region. At the end of the academic year, during the long vacation, the NBS offered summer jobs to college students on vacation. They did not pay very well but provided young people with exposure to the world of journalism, broadcasting, and news reporting. NBS was inundated with a large number of applicants during this particular long vacationnot only students from my alma mater, University College, Ibadan, but from those returning from studies abroad. A few weeks later one could hear the unmistakable banter of young people as they milled about the normally quiet halls of the Nigerian Broadcasting Service. As the controller I had very little interaction with the students. I found all this excited commotion amusing and got on with my work. But soon after I was told by my secretary that a delegation of university students wanted to speak with me about a matter of great importance. The students trooped into my office led by their leader, Christie Okoli. She was a beautiful young woman and very articulate, and when she spoke she caught my attention. I was spellbound. In grave tones she announced the complaint of the students: There was one student whose salary was higher than all the others, and they wanted equal pay for equal time. I was kindly disposed toward them and made sure that all of the students received the same remuneration for the work that they did. My interest in Christie grew rapidly into a desire to get to know her better. I discovered, for instance, that she was from the ancient town of Awka, the present-day capital of Anambra state. Awka held a soft spot in my heart because it was my mothers hometown, and it was known throughout Igbo land and beyond for its skilled artisans and blacksmiths, who fashioned bronze, wood, and metal carvings of a bold and haunting beauty. Two years into our friendship, Christie and I were engaged.  Christie was from a very prominent Awka family. She was the daughter of one of the most formidable Igbo men of the early twentieth century, Timothy Chukwukadibia Okoli, and Mgboye Matilda Mmuo, who unfortunately died not long after Christie was born. T. C. Okoli, as he was widely known, was the son of a famous dibia, or traditional medicine man, known from Arochukwu to Nri and from Onitsha to Ogoja for skills that encompassed herbal medicine, mysticism, divination, and magic. After a lifetime in the service of the ancient medical practice, Okoli gave his son the name Chukwukadibia, which means God is greater than a traditional medicine man. He encouraged his newborn son to seek a Christian life. An early convert to Christianity in Igbo land, T. C. Okoli was one of the few educated men of his time to attain the position of senior post- master in the colonial Posts and Telecommunications (P&T) Department. He was a profoundly generous man, and used his resourceswhich were quite outstanding for a Nigerian at that timeto sponsor the education of gifted children from scores of families in Awka. When he died at 102, in the mid1980s, all thirteen villages of the town celebrated his life for several days, through both traditional and Christian rites and festivities. Meeting Christies father for the first time was a great thrill for me. His compound in Awka was always full of laughter. People visited constantly, some to drink and make merry, others for favors and to pay their respects. I belonged to the latter category. We arrived, and Christie promptly took me to meet her dad. Papa she said, meet Chinua Achebe. We shook hands, and then the pleasantries gave way to a brief interview: Where are you from, young man? What do you do? Where did you go to school? Who are your parents? I quickly discovered that T. C. Okoli was an Anglophile: He took pleasure in reciting passages in English from scripture, Shakespeare, and poetry; and he had sent several of his children off to England to advance their education. He was also a deeply respectful and kind man who left me with a lasting lesson that I have never forgotten. Christie and I were talking one evening when Okoli walked into the living room. We exchanged greetings. He sat down and listened to our conversation while sipping wine, watching the two of us talk. By this time I could say confidently that he liked me. We got along very well. But in the course of the conversation he missed something Christie said and asked for clarification. At this prompting I responded by saying jestfully in Igbo: Rapia ka ona aghaigha agba, or in English, Dont mind her . . . wagging her jaw. . . . T. C. Okoli sat up and rebuked me. He said: Dont say or imply that what someone else has to say or is saying is not worth attending or listening to. It immediately struck me that I had to be careful about the way I handled someone elses words or opinions, especially Christies. Even when there was strong disagreement, one had to remember to be discordant with respect. Discovering Things Fall Apart Soon after this educational encounter with my future father-in-law I moved to Lagos to interview for a new position at the headquarters of what was now called the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation (NBC). The Talks Department hired me to maul over scripts and prepare them for broadcast. A tedious job, it nevertheless honed my skill for writing realistic dialogue, a gift that I gratefully tapped into when writing my novels. In my second or third year at University College, Ibadan, I had offered two short stories, Polar Undergraduate and Marriage Is a Private Affair, to the University Herald, the campus magazine. They were accepted and published. I published other stories during that time, including The Old Order in Conflict with the New and Dead Mens Path. In my third year I was invited to join the editorial committee of the journal. A bit later I became the magazines editor. At the University College, Ibadan, I was in contact with instructors of literature, of religion, and of history who had spent several years teaching in England. Studying religion was new to me and interesting because the focus went beyond Christian theology to encompass wider scholarshipWest African religions. One of my professors in the Department of Religion, Dr. Parrinder, was a pioneer in the area. He had done extensive research in West African religions and cosmology, particularly in Dahomey, present-day Republic of Benin. For the first time I was able to see the systemsincluding my own compared and placed side by side, which was really exciting. I also encountered another professor, James Welch, in that department, an extraordinary man, who had been chaplain to King George VI, chaplain to the BBC, and all kinds of high-powered things before he came to University College, Ibadan. My professors were excellent people and excellent teachers, but they were not always the ones I needed. James Welch said to me, We may not be able to teach you what you need or what you want. We can only teach you what we know. I thought that was wonderful. Welch helped me understand that they were not sent there to translate their knowledge to me in a way that would help me channel my creative energies to tell my story of Africa, my story of Nigeria, the story of myself. I learned, if I may put it simply, that my story had to come from within me. Finding that inner creative spark required introspection, deep personal scrutiny, and connection, and this was not something anybody could really teach me.1 I have written elsewhere of how I fared when I entered a short story competition in the Department of English, and how my teacher, who supervised this competition, announced the result, which was that nobody who entered the competition was good enough. I was more or less singled out as someone with some promise, but the story I submitted lacked form. Understandably, I wanted to find out more about what the professor meant by form. It seemed to me that here was some secret competence that I needed to be taught. But when I then applied some pressure on this professor to explain to me what form was, it was clear that she was not preparedthat she could not explain it to me. And it dawned on me that despite her excellent mind and background, she was not capable of teaching across cultures, from her English culture to mine. It was in these circumstances that I was moved to put down on paper the story that became Things Fall Apart. I was conscripted by the story, and I was writing it at all timeswhenever there was any opening. It felt like a sentence, an imprisonment of creativity. Through it all I did not neglect the employment for which I earned a salary. Additional promotions came at NBC, and very swiftly, particularly after most of the British returned to England; I was appointed director of external broadcasting. I worked on my writing mostly at night. I was seized by the story and I found myself totally ensconced in it. It was almost like living in a parallel realm, a dual existence not in any negative sense but in the way a hand has two surfaces, united in purpose but very different in tone, appearance, character, and structure. I had in essence discovered the writers life, one that exists in the world of the pages of his or her story and then seamlessly steps into the realities of everyday life. The scribbling finally grew into a manuscript. I wanted to have not just a good manuscript but a good-looking manuscript, because it seemed to me that that would help to draw readers and publishers attention to the work. So I decided, on the strength of a recommendation of an advertisement in a British magazine or journal that described a companys ability to transform a manuscript through typing into an attractive document, to send it off for polishing. What I did next, in retrospect, was quite nave, even foolish. I put my handwritten documents together, went to the post office, and had them parcel the only copy of the manuscript I had to the London address of the highly recommended typing agency that was in the business of manuscript preparation. A letter came from this agency after a few weeks. They confirmed that they had received my document and wrote that the next thing I should do was send them thirty-two pounds, which was the cost of producing my manuscript. Now, thirtytwo pounds was a lot of money in 1956, and a significant slice of my salary, but I was encouraged by the fact that I had received this information, this feedback, and that the people sounded as if they were going to be of great value to me. So, I sent off the payment as instructed. What happened next was a near catastrophe. The typing agency, obviously having received the money I sent, went silent. One week passed, then two, three, four, five, six weeks, and I began to panic. I wrote two letters inquiring about the status of the manuscript preparation and I got no answer. One had a great deal of confidence and faith in the British system that we had grown up in, a confidence and faith in British institutions. One trusted that things would get where they were sent; postal theft, tampering, or loss of documents were unheard-of. Today one would not even contemplate sending off materials of importance so readily, either abroad or even locally, by mail. The good luck was that at that point in my career I was working very closely with a British former BBC Talks producer, Angela Beattie. Beattie was seconded to the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation, for which she served as head of our two-person department. She was the head of Talks and I was the Talks producer, and we had a secretary, I believe, also from the BBC. It was to Beattie that I now went to and told my story about the British typing agency. Ms. Angela Beattie was shockedshe was a no-nonsense person. Give me their name and address, she insisted. Fortunately, she was about to go to England on leave, so she became the perfect vehicle to carry my anguish to the typists in London. And she did it in her distinctive way. She arrived at the offices of the typing agency and asked to speak to the manager, who showed up swiftly. Angela Beattie asked the manager sternly what she had done with the manuscript that her colleague in Lagos, Nigeria, had sent. Here, right before them, armed with a threat, was a well-connected woman who could really make trouble for them. The people there were surprised and shaken. Now, I am going back to Nigeria in three weeks, Angela Beattie said as she left the agencys office, and when I get there, let us hope that the manuscript you took money to prepare has been received by its owner, or else you will hear more about it. A few weeks later I received a handsome package in the mail. It was my manuscript. I look back now at those events and state categorically that had the manuscript been lost I most certainly would have been irreversibly discouraged from continuing my writing career. Later that year, in the fall of 1956 or thereabouts, I was selected to travel to the British Broadcasting Corporation school in London where its staff were trained. Bisi Onabanjo, a good friend of mine and the future governor of Ogun state, was also among the small group of Nigerians attending this course. I had not up to this time traveled outside Nigeria. In those days such trips were done by boat, as commercial air flights from Lagos were not commonplace. London was a brand-new and pleasant experience. I took advanced technical production skills courses during my time at the BBC staff school, and in between my classes was able to take in the sights and sounds of London, a city that remains one of my favorite international capitals. I took along my typed manuscript, hoping to bump into a number of writers and publishers who could provide me with some advice about how best to get the book published. I was fortunate to meet and make the acquaintance of Gilbert Phelps, a British writer, who read the manuscript and was quite enthusiastic about its literary merit and prospects for publication. When Mr. Phelps kindly suggested that I hand over the manuscript to him to pass on to some publishers he knew; I hesitated and told him that I needed some more time to work on the novel. I was still wondering whether to publish it in three parts or divide the work into three separate books.2 About a year later I wrote Gilbert Phelps and informed him that my novel, Things Fall Apart, was ready, and he happily sent the manuscript off to a number of publishers. There were several of instant rejections. Some did not even bother to read it, jaundiced by their impression that a book with an African backdrop had no marketability. Some of the responders found the very concept of an African novel amusing. The books fortunes changed when it got into the hands of Alan Hill and Donald McRae, executives of Heinemann. McRae had extensive experience traveling throughout Africa and encouraged Heinemann to publish the novel with a powerful recommendation: This is the best first novel I have read since the war.3 It was under Alan Hills guidance that Things Fall Apart received immediate and consistent support. The initial publication run from Heinemann was two thousand hardcover copies. Things Fall Apart got some of its earliest endorsements and positive reviews from Canada, where critics such as G. D. Killam and the novelist Jean Margaret Laurence embraced it. Later the postcolonial literary critics Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin helped introduce the book into the Australian and British literary establishments. Michael Thelwell, Bernth Lindfors, Priscilla Tyler, Charles Larson, and Catherine Lynnette Innes were some of the first intellectuals in America to pick up the novel and present it to an American audience. In England the book received positive reviews from the Observer, Time and Tide, and The Times Literary Supplement, among other publications. But not all the reviews were as kind or positive. Some failed to understand the point of African Literature and what I and others were trying to achieve by telling our own stories. It did the work a great deal of good, however, that the distinguished novelist Angus Wilson and the well-respected literary critic Walter Allen wrote positively about my first novel. In Nigeria there was a mixed bag of responses. Some of my old teachers at Ibadan found the idea of my publishing a novel charming, but many African intellectuals saw both literary and political merit in the work. When I wrote Things Fall Apart I began to understand and value my traditional Igbo history even more. I am not suggesting that I was an expert in the history of the world. I was a very young man. I knew I had a story, but how it fit into the story of the worldI really had no sense of that. After a while I began to understand why the book had resonance. Its meaning for my Igbo people was clear to me, but I didnt know how other people elsewhere would respond to it. Did it have any meaning or relevance for them? I realized that it did when, to give just one example, the whole class of a girls college in South Korea wrote to me, and each one expressed an opinion about the book. And then I learned something: They had a history that was similar to the story of Things Fall Apartthe history of colonization. This I didnt know before. Their colonizer was Japan. So these people across the waters were able to relate to the story of dispossession in Africa. People from different parts of the world can respond to the same story if it says something to them about their own history and their own experience.4 A Lucky Generation It has often been said that my generation was a very lucky one. And I agree. My luck was actually quite extraordinary. And it began quite early. The pace of change in Nigeria from the 1940s was incredible. I am not just talking about the rate of development, with villages transforming into towns, or the coming of modern comforts, such as electricity or running water or modes of transportation, but more of a sense that we were standing figuratively and literally at the dawn of a new era. My generation was summoned, as it were, to bear witness to two remarkable transitionsthe first the aforementioned impressive economic, social, and political transformation of Nigeria into a midrange country, at least by third world standards. But, more profoundly, barely two decades later we were thrust into the throes of perhaps Nigerias greatest twentieth-century momentour elevation from a colonized country to an independent nation. The March to Independence The general feeling in the air as independence approached was extraordinary, like the building anticipation of the relief of torrential rains after a season of scorching hot Harmattan winds and bush fires. We were all looking forward to feeling the joy that Indiathe great jewel of the British Empiremust have felt in 1948, the joy that Ghana must have felt years later, in 1957. We had no doubt where we were going. We were going to inherit freedom that was all that mattered. The possibilities for us were endless, at least so it seemed at the time. Nigeria was enveloped by a certain assurance of an unbridled destiny, of an overwhelming excitement about lifes promise, unburdened by any knowledge of providences intended destination. Ghana was a particularly relevant example for us subjects in the remaining colonies and dominions of the British Empire. There was a growing confidence, not just a feeling, that we would do just as well parting ways with Her Majestys empire. If Ghana seemed more effective, as some of our people like to say, perhaps it was because she was smaller in size and neat, as if it was tied together more delicately by well-groomed, expert hands. So we had in 1957 an extraordinary event. I remember it vividly. It was not a Nigerian event. Ghana is three hundred or more miles away from us, but we saw her success as ours as well. I remember celebrating with Ghanaian and Nigerian friends in Lagos all night on the eve of Ghanas independence from Britain, ecstatic for our fellow Africans, only to wake up the next morning to find that we were still in Nigeria. Ghana had made it, leaving us all behind. But our day came, finally, three years after hers. Now let it be said: There was a subtle competition between the two countries. There was a sense in which one could say that Ghana and Nigeria resented each other and competed for supremacy in every spherepolitics, academia, sports, you name it. It is possible that Nigerians were less accurate in thinking of our rival neighbor as being perhaps too small to matter. Of course Ghanaians came right back by saying that Nigeria is bigger than Ghana in the way in which threepence was bigger than sixpence. If one were to look at the various denominations of coins in those days, one would discover that three- pence was very huge, much larger than sixpence, and the quality of metal used in making the smaller denomination was clearly of inferior value and had less purchasing power in the marketplace, where it mattered most. So the relationship between Ghana and Nigeria has always been very important. Ghanaian nationalists were heavily influenced by their Nigerian counterparts.  The father of African independence was Nnamdi Azikiwe. There is no question at all about that. Azikiwe, fondly referred to by his admirers as Zik, was the preeminent political figure of my youth1 and a man who was endowed with the political pan-Africanist vision. He had help, no doubt, from several eminent sons and daughters of the soil. When Azikiwe came back from his university studies in the United States of America, in 1934 or thereabout, he did not return to Onitsha, his hometown. He settled at first in Accra, in the Gold Coast (present-day Ghana), where he worked as the editor of the African Morning Post, a new daily newspaper. There were stories of inter-ethnic friction in the Gold Coast, so he moved to Lagos. Despite initial problems in Ghana, Azikiwe had acquired admirers, especially young aspiring freedom fighters, including Kwame Nkrumah, the greatest of them all. Nkrumah was still a student in Ghana, but he was motivated to go to America to study largely as a result of Azikiwes influence. Zik opened the historically black college in the United States that he attendedLincoln Universityto other West Africans and Nigerians. Quite a number of young Africans who left the country for America did so because of Azikiwe. It didnt hurt that Azikiwe wrote glowingly about America in his newspaper articles on almost a daily basis. America, you see, seemed to a number of those young people to provide an escape from the chains of colonialism.2 Soon after Azikiwe arrived in Lagos he established his own paper, The West African Pilot. At this time there were two or three families of newspapers: Azikiwes and an even older group from Freetown, Sierra Leone; The Accra Herald from the Gold Coast; The Anglo African; Iwe Ihorin (a prominent Yoruba newspaper) in Lagos; and Herbert Macauleys The Daily News. These newspapers had different traditions. There used to be a joke about the quality of newspapers that were founded by aristocratic Lagosians.3 Some of these papers went out of their way to be highbrow; it was said that occasionally large chunks of the editorials of some were written in Latin. In contrast to his competition Azikiwes newspaper was written in accessible, stripped-down Englishthe type of prose educated members of society often snickered at. And that was Azikiwes intention, to speak directly to the masses. His strategy was an incredible success. The West African Pilots anticolonial message was spread very quickly, widely, and effectively. From the time of its establishment through the 1940s and 1950s, The West African Pilot was the most influential publication of its type throughout British West Africa from Sierra Leone through Ghana to Nigeria. Azikiwe wanted to remain financially autonomous from the British, so he established the African Continental Bank in 1944 and invited wealthy and influential Nigerians such as Sir Louis Odumegwu Ojukwu to join the board. Azikiwe also started newspaper outposts in Lagos, Ibadan, Kano, Port Harcourt, and the market town of Onitsha. I remember in particular that traders in Onitsha and other markets throughout Nigeria relished The West African Pilots daily political analysis and editorials. Many learned to read with the help of The Pilot. The traders, in their eagerness to read Azikiwes paper, often ignored earlymorning customers who visted their stalls. The West African Pilot served other purposes. It became the nurturing ground for top journalistic and future political talent. Anthony Enahoro, who became the papers editor, and Akinola Lasekan, the legendary political cartoonist, are just two examples that come to mind. The West African Pilot enjoyed an exponential level of commercial as well as critical success after it supported striking Nigerian workers against the British government in the 1940s. Its circulation was in the tens of thousands. That was an outstanding achievement for its time.4 The Cradle of Nigerian Nationalism Here is a piece of heresy: The British governed their colony of Nigeria with considerable care. There was a very highly competent cadre of government officials imbued with a high level of knowledge of how to run a country. This was not something that the British achieved only in Nigeria; they were able to manage this on a bigger scale in India and Australia. The British had the experience of governing and doing it competently. I am not justifying colonialism. But it is important to face the fact that British colonies, more or less, were expertly run. There was a distinct order during this time. I recall the day I traveled from Lagos to Ibadan and stayed with Christopher Okigbo that evening. I took off again the next morning, driving alone, going all the way from Lagos to Asaba, crossing the River Niger, to visit my relatives in the east. That was how it was done in those days. One was not consumed by fear of abduction or armed robbery. There was a certain preparation that the British had undertaken in her colonies. So as the handover time came, it was done with great precision. As we praise the British, let us also remember the Nigerian nationalists those who had a burning desire for independence and fought for it. There was a body of young and old people that my parents generation admired greatly, and that we later learned about and deeply appreciated. Herbert Macauley, for instance, often referred to as the father of Nigerian nationalism,1 was a very distinguished Nigerian born during the nineteenth century and the first president of the Nigerian National Democratic Party (NNDP), which was founded in 1922.2 The dawn of World War II caused a bit of a lull in the organized independence struggles that had been centered mainly in the Western Region of the country up to that time. Across the River Niger, in Eastern Nigeria, I was entering my teenage years, bright-eyed and beginning to grapple with my colonial environment. At this time most of the worlds attention, including Nigerias, was turned to the war. Schools and other institutions were converted into makeshift camps for soldiers from the empire, and there was a great deal of local military recruitment. A number of my relatives quickly volunteered their services to His Majestys regiments. The colonies became increasingly important to Great Britains war effort by providing a steady stream of revenue from the export of agricultural productspalm oil, groundnuts, cocoa, rubber, etc. I remember hearing stories of valiant fighting by a number of African soldiers in faraway places, such as Abyssinia (todays Ethiopia), North Africa, and Burma (todays Myanmar).3 The postwar era saw an explosion of political organization. Newspapers, newsreels, and radio programs were full of the exploits of Nnamdi Azikiwe and the National Council of Nigeria and the Cameroons (NCNC, which later became the National Council of Nigerian Citizens) that was founded in 1944. Azikiwe built upon lessons he had learned from earlier forays in political activism and successfully persuaded several active members of the Nigerian Youth Movement to form an umbrella group of all the major Nigerian organizations. By the time I became a young adult, Obafemi Awolowo had emerged as one of Nigerias dominant political figures. He was an erudite and accomplished lawyer who had been educated at the University of London. When he returned to the Nigerian political scene from England in 1947, Awolowo found the once powerful political establishment of western Nigeria in disarraysidetracked by partisan and intra-ethnic squabbles. Chief Awolowo and close associates reunited his ancient Yoruba people with powerful glueresuscitated ethnic prideand created a political party, the Action Group, in 1951, from an amalgamation of the Egbe Omo Oduduwa, the Nigerian Produce Traders Association, and a few other factions.4 Over the years Awolowo had become increasingly concerned about what he saw as the domination of the NCNC by the Igbo elite, led by Azikiwe. Some cynics believe the formation of the Action Group was not influenced by tribal loyalities but a purely tactical political move to regain regional and southern political power and influence from the dominant NCNC. Initially Chief Obafemi Awolowo struggled to woo support from the Ibadanbased (and other non-Ijebu) Yoruba leaders who considered him a radical and a bit of an upstart. However, despite some initial difficulty, Awolowo transformed the Action Group into a formidable, highly disciplined political machine that often outperformed the NCNC in regional elections. It did so by meticulously galvanizing political support in Yoruba land and among the riverine and minority groups in the Niger Delta who shared a similar dread of the prospects of Igbo political domination.5 When Sir Ahmadu Bello, the Sardauna of Sokoto,6 decided to create the Northern Peoples Congress (NPC) in the late 1940s, he knew that the educationally disadvantaged North did not have as rich a source of Westerneducated politicians to choose from as the South did. He overcame this shortcoming by pulling together an assortment of leaders from the Islamic territories under his influence and a few Western-educated intellectualsthe most prominent in my opinion being Aminu Kano and Alhaji Tafewa Balewa, Nigerias first prime minister. Frustrated by what he saw as Ahmadu Bellos limited political vision,7 the incomparable Aminu Kano, under whom I would serve as the deputy national president of the Peoples Redemption Party decades later, would leave the NPC in 1950 to form the left-of-center political party, the Northern Elements Progressive Union (NEPU).8 Sir Ahmadu Bello was a schoolteacher by training. He was a contentious and ardently ambitious figure who claimed direct lineage from one of the founders of the Islamic Sokoto CaliphateShehu Usman dan Fodio. It was also widely known that he had aspired to the throne of the Sultan of Sokoto. By midcentury, through brilliant political maneuvering among the northern ruling classes, Sir Ahmadu Bello emerged as the most powerful politician in the Northern Region, indeed in all of Nigeria. Sir Ahmadu Bello was able to control northern Nigeria politically by feeding on the fears of the ruling emirs and a small elite group of Western-educated northerners. His ever-effective mantra was that in order to protect the mainly feudal Norths hegemonic interests it was critical to form a political party capable of resisting the growing power of Southern politicians. Ahmadu Bello and his henchmen shared little in terms of ideological or political aspirations with their southern counterparts. With the South split between Azikiwes National Council of Nigerian Citizens (NCNC) and Awolowos Action Group, his ability to hold the North together meant that the NPC in essence became Nigerias ruling party. A testament to its success is the fact that the NPC later would not only hold the majority of seats in the postindependence parliament, but as a consequence would be called upon to name the first prime minister of Nigeria.9  The minorities of the Niger Delta, Mid-West, and the Middle Belt regions of Nigeria were always uncomfortable with the notion that they had to fit into the tripod of the largest ethnic groups that was NigeriaHausa/Fulani, Yoruba, and Igbo. Many of themIjaw, Kanuri, Ibibio, Tiv, Itsekiri, Isang, Urhobo, Anang, and Efikwere from ancient nation-states in their own right. Their leaders, however, often had to subsume their own ethnic ambitions within alliances with one of the big three groups in order to attain greater political results. The British were well aware of the inter-ethnic tensions and posturing for power among the three main ethnic groups. By 1951 they had divided the country into the Northern, Eastern, and Western Regions, with their own respective houses of assembly, to contain this rising threat.10 There was also what many thought was an inane house of chiefsa poor copy of the House of Lords of the British Parliament. Clear-eyed pundits saw this mainly as a political ploy to appease the Northerners and Westerners who wanted their traditional rulers to play a greater role in Nigerian affairs. Initially the British resisted any agitations for independence, often by handing out stiff jail terms for sedition to the disturbers of the peace. They knew the value of their colonies, and the natural resources they possessedin Nigerias case oil, coal, gold, tin, columbite, cocoa, palm oil, groundnuts, and rubber, as well as the immense human resources and intellectual capital. Surely Great Britain had no plans to hand all these riches over without a fight. Over time, however, it became clear to the colonizers that they were engaged in a losing battle. By the end of World War II Great Britain was financially and politically exhausted. This weakness was exploited by Mohandas Gandhi and his cohorts in India during their own struggle against British rule. Nigerian veterans from different theaters of the war had acquired certain skillsimportant military expertise in organization, movement, strategy, and combatduring their service to the king. Another proficiency that came naturally to this group was the skill of protest, which was quickly absorbed by the Nigerian nationalists. Post-Independence Nigeria By the late 1950s the British were rapidly accepting the inevitability of independence coming to one of their major colonies, Nigeria. Officers began to retire and return home to England, vacating their positions in Nigerias colonial government. They left in droves, quietly, amiably, often at night, mainly on ships, but also, particularly the wealthier ones, on planes. The British clearly had a well-thought-out exit strategy, with handover plans in place long before we noticed. Literally all government ministries, public and privately held firms, corporations, organizations, and schools saw the majority of their expatriate staff leave. Not everyone left, however; some, particularly in the commercial sector and the oil businesses, stayed. The civilized behavior of their brethren made this an acceptable development. While this quiet transition was happening a number of internal jobs, especially the senior management positions, began to open up for Nigerians, particularly for those with a university education. It was into these positions vacated by the British that a number of people like myself were placeda daunting, exhilarating inheritance that was not without its anxieties. Most of us felt well prepared, because we had received an outstanding education. This is not to say that there were not those racked with doubt, and sometimes outright dread. There were. But most of us were ready to take destiny in our own hands, and for a while at least, it worked quite well. This bequest was much greater than just stepping into jobs left behind by the British. Members of my generation also moved into homes in the former British quarters previously occupied by members of the European senior civil service. These homes often came with servantschauffeurs, maids, cooks, gardeners, stewardswhom the British had organized meticulously to ease their colonial sojourn. Now following the departure of the Europeans, many domestic staff stayed in the same positions and were only too grateful to continue their designated salaried roles in post-independence Nigeria. Their masters were no longer European but their own brothers and sisters. This bequest continued in the form of new club memberships and access to previously all-white areas of town, restaurants, and theaters.  This account about the handover of power I have just provided is perhaps too wonderful to be absolutely true. History teaches us that people who have been oppressedthis is the language of the freedom fight, and it was a fightare often too ready to let bygones be bygones. Clearly it was more complicated than that; it was a long struggle. Having said that, I think most who were there would admit that when the moment came, it was handled quite well. One example that I will give to illustrate the complexity of that moment of transition occurred at the very highest level of government. When Britain decided to hand over power to Nigeria, they also decided to change the governor general. They brought a new governor general from the Sudan, Sir James Robertson, to take the reins in Nigeria. Now that Independence Day was approaching a number of onlookers were wondering why there was a new posting from Britain, and no provision made for a Nigerian successor. It became clear that Sir James was going to be there on Independence Day and, as it turned out, wanted to stay on as governor general for a whole year into the period of freedom. One wondered how he was going to leave. Would it be in disgrace? Would he be hiding, or something of the sort? It is now widely known that Sir James Robertson played an important role in overseeing the elections (or lack thereof) at independence, throwing his weight behind Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, who had been tapped to become Nigerias first prime minister. I remember hearing Azikiwe comment years later on those events. He was asked in a small gathering: Why did Sir James Robertson not go home, like the other people who were leaving? Azikiwe made light of the question: Well, when he told me that he was going to stay on, I said to him, Go on, stay as long as you like. The laughter that followed did not obscure the greater meaning of his statement.  Later it was discovered that a courageous English junior civil servant named Harold Smith had been selected by no other than Sir James Robertson to oversee the rigging of Nigerias first election so that its compliant friends in [Northern Nigeria] would win power, dominate the country, and serve British interests after independence. Despite the enticements of riches and bribes (even a knighthood, we are told), Smith refused to be part of this elaborate hoax to fix Nigerias elections, and he swiftly became one of the casualties of this mischief. Smiths decision was a bold choice that cost him his job, career, and reputation (at least until recently).1 In a sense, Nigerian independence came with a British governor general in command, and, one might say, popular faith in genuine democracy was compromised from its birth. The Decline Within six years of this tragic colonial manipulation Nigeria was a cesspool of corruption and misrule. Public servants helped themselves freely to the nations wealth. Elections were blatantly rigged. The subsequent national census was outrageously stage-managed; judges and magistrates were manipulated by the politicians in power. The politicians themselves were pawns of foreign business interests.1 The social malaise in Nigerian society was political corruption. The structure of the country was such that there was an inbuilt power struggle among the ethnic groups, and of course those who were in power wanted to stay in power. The easiest and simplest way to retain it, even in a limited area, was to appeal to tribal sentiments, so they were egregiously exploited in the 1950s and 1960s. The original idea of one Nigeria was pressed by the leaders and intellectuals from the Eastern Region. With all their shortcomings, they had this idea to build the country as one. The first to object were the Northerners, led by the Sardauna, who were followed closely by the Awolowo clique that had created the Action Group. The Northern Peoples Congress of the Sardaunians was supposed to be a national party, yet it refused to change its name from Northern to Nigerian Peoples Congress, even for the sake of appearances. It refused right up to the end of the civilian regime. The prime minister of Nigeria, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, who had been built up into a great statesman by the Western world, did nothing to save his country from impending chaos. The British made certain on the eve of their departure that power went to that conservative element in the country that had played no real part in the struggle for independence. This was the situation in which I wrote my novel A Man of the People. Nigerian artists responded to these events in a variety of ways. The irrepressible Wole Soyinka put on the stage a devastating satire, Before the Blackout, which played to packed houses night after night in Ibadan. The popular traveling theater of Hubert Ogunde and his many wives began to stage a play clearly directed against the crooked premier of Western Nigeria. The theater group was declared an unlawful society and banned in Western Nigeria. Things were coming to a head in that region. Violence erupted after an unbelievable election swindle, as a result of the anger and frustration of Western Nigerians. It was in these circumstances that Wole Soyinka was charged with holding up the Ibadan radio station and removing the premiers taped speech! Creative writers in independent Nigeria found themselves with a new, terrifying problem on their hands: They found that the independence their country was supposed to have won was totally without content. In the words of Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, Nigeria was given her freedom on a platter of gold. We should have known that freedom should be won, not given on a plate. Like the head of John the Baptist, this gift to Nigeria proved most unlucky. The Role of the Writer in Africa What then were we to do as writers? What was our role in our new country? How were we to think about the use of our talents? I can say that when a number of us decided that we would be writers, we had not thought through these questions very clearly. In fact, we did not have a clue what we were up against. What I can say is that it was clear to many of us that an indigenous African literary renaissance was overdue. A major objective was to challenge stereotypes, myths, and the image of ourselves and our continent, and to recast them through storiesprose, poetry, essays, and books for our children. That was my overall goal. When a number of us decided to pick up the pen and make writing a career there was no African literature as we know it today. There were of course our great oral traditionthe epics of the Malinke, the Bamana, and the Fulanithe narratives of Olaudah Equaino, works by D. A. Fagunwa and Muhammadu Bello, and novels by Pita Nwana, Amos Tutuola, and Cyprian Ekwensi. Across the African continent, literary aficionados could savor the works of Egyptian, Nubian, and Carthaginian antiquity; Amharic and Tigrigna writings from Ethiopia and Eritrea; and the magnificent poetry and creation myths of Somalia. There was morethe breathtakingly beautiful Swahili poetry of East and Central Africa, and the chronicles, legends, and fables of the Ashanti, Dogon, Hutu, Kalanga, Mandingo, Ndebele, Ovambo, Shona, Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Tutsi, Venda, Wolof, Xhosa, and Zulu. Olive Schreiners nineteenth-century classic Story of an African Farm and works by Samuel Mqhayi and Thomas Mofolo, Alan Paton, Camara Laye, Mongo Beti, Peter Abrahams, and Ferdinand Oyono, all preceded our time. Still, the numbers were not sufficient.1 And so I had no idea when I was writing Things Fall Apart whether it would even be accepted or published. All of this was newthere was nothing by which I could gauge how it was going to be received. Writing has always been a serious business for me. I felt it was a moral obligation. A major concern of the time was the absence of the African voice. Being part of that dialogue meant not only sitting at the table but effectively telling the African story from an African perspectivein full earshot of the world. The preparation for this life of writing, I have mentioned, came from English-system-style schools and university. I read Shakespeare, Dickens, and all the books that were read in the English public schools. They were novels and poems about English culture, and some things I didnt know anything about. When I saw a good sentence, saw a good phrase from the Western canon, of course I was influenced by it. But the story itselfthere werent any models. Those that were set in Africa were not particularly inspiring. If they were not saying something that was antagonistic toward us, they werent concerned about us. When people talk about African culture they often mean an assortment of ancient customs and traditions. The reasons for this view are quite clear. When the first Europeans came to Africa they knew very little of the history and complexity of the people and the continent. Some of that group persuaded themselves that Africa had no culture, no religion, and no history. It was a convenient conclusion, because it opened the door for all sorts of rationalizations for the exploitation that followed. Africa was bound, sooner or later, to respond to this denigration by resisting and displaying her own accomplishments. To do this effectively her spokesmenthe writers, intellectuals, and some politicians, including Azikiwe, Senghor, Nkrumah, Nyerere, Lumumba, and Mandela engaged Africas past, stepping back into what can be referred to as the era of purity, before the coming of Europe. We put into the books and poems what was uncovered there, and this became known as African culture. This was a very special kind of inspiration. Some of us decided to tackle the big subjects of the dayimperialism, slavery, independence, gender, racism, etc. And some did not. One could write about roses or the air or about love for all I cared; that was fine too. As for me, however, I chose the former. Engaging such heavy subjects while at the same time trying to help create a unique and authentic African literary tradition would mean that some of us would decide to use the colonizers tools: his language, altered sufficiently to bear the weight of an African creative aesthetic, infused with elements of the African literary tradition. I borrowed proverbs from our culture and history, colloquialisms and African expressive language from the ancient griots, the worldviews, perspectives, and customs from my Igbo tradition and cosmology, and the sensibilities of everyday people. It was important to us that a body of work be developed of the highest possible quality that would oppose the negative discourse in some of the novels we encountered. By writing back to the West we were attempting to reshape the dialogue between the colonized and the colonizer. Our efforts, we hoped, would broaden the worlds understanding, appreciation, and conceptualization of what literature meant when including the African voice and perspective.2 We were clearly engaged in what Ode Ogede aptly refers to as the politics of representation.3 This is another way of stating the fact of what I consider to be my mission in life. My kind of storytelling has to add its voice to this universal storytelling before we can say, Now weve heard it all. I worry when somebody from one particular tradition stands up and says, The novel is dead, the story is dead. I find this to be unfair, to put it mildly. You told your own story, and now youre announcing the novel is dead. Well, I havent told mine yet.4 There are some who believe that the writer has no role in politics or the social upheavals of his or her day. Some of my friends say, No, it is too rough there. A writer has no business being where it is so rough. The writer should be on the sidelines with his notepad and pen, where he can observe with objectivity. I believe that the African writer who steps aside can only write footnotes or a glossary when the event is over. He or she will become like the contemporary intellectual of futility in many other places, asking questions like: Who am I? What is the meaning of my existence? Does this place belong to me or to someone else? Does my life belong to me or to some other person? These are questions that no one can answer. Ali Mazrui famously restated this position in his novel The Trial of Christopher Okigbo in which he takes my friend, the great poet, to task for, as Mazrui believes, wasting his great talent on a conflict of disputable merit: The Nigerian Civil War and all its ramified implications [can be] compressed in the single poetic tragedy of the death of Christopher Okigbo.5 In Mazruis fiction Christopher Okigbo finds himself charged with the offence of putting society before art in his scale of values. . . . No great artist has a right to carry patriotism to the extent of destroying his creative potential.6 Christopher Okigbo believed, as I do, that art and community in Africa are clearly linked. African art as we understand it has not been distilled or purified and refined to the point where it has lost all traces of real life, lost the vitality of the street, like art from some advanced societies and academic art tend to be. In Africa the tendency is to keep art involved with the people. It is clearly emphasized among my own Igbo people that art must never be allowed to escape into the rarefied atmosphere but must remain active in the lives of the members of society. I have described earlier the practice of mbari, the Igbo concept of art as celebration. Different aspects of Igbo life are integrated in this art form. Even those who are not trained artists are brought in to participate in these artistic festivals, in which the whole life of the world is depicted. Ordinary people must be brought in; a conscious effort must be made to bring the life of the village or town into this art. The Igbo culture says no condition is permanent. There is constant change in the world. Foreign visitors who had not been encountered up to that time are brought in as well, to illustrate the dynamic nature of life. The point Im trying to make is that there is a need to bring life back into art by bringing art into life, so that the two can hold a conversation. In a novel such as Amos Tutuolas The Palm-Wine Drinkard you can see this vitality put to work on the written page. There is no attempt to draw a line between what is permissible and what is not, what is possible and what is not possible, what is new and what is old. In a story that is set in the distant past you suddenly see a telephone, a car, a bishopall kinds of things that dont seem to tie in. But in fact what you have is the whole life of the community, not just the community of humans but the community of ancestors, the animal world, of trees, and so on. Everything plays a part.  My own assessment is that the role of the writer is not a rigid position and depends to some extent on the state of health of his or her society. In other words, if a society is ill the writer has a responsibility to point it out. If the society is healthier, the writers job is different. We established the Society of Nigerian Authors (SONA) in the mid-1960s as an attempt to put our writers in a firm and dynamic frame. It was sort of a trade union. We thought it would keep our members safe and protect other artists as well. We hoped that our existence would create an environment in Nigeria where freedom of creative expression was not only possible but protected. We sought ultimately through our art to create for Nigeria an environment of good order and civilizationa daunting task that needed to be tackled in a country engulfed in crisis. The notion of beneficent fiction is simply one of defining storytelling as a creative component of human experience, human life. It is something griots have done in Africa from the dawn of timepass down stories that have a positive purpose and a use for society, from generation to generation. Some people flinch when you talk about art in the context of the needs of society, thinking you are introducing something far too common for a discussion of art. Why should art have a purpose and a use? Art shouldnt be concerned with purpose and reason and need, they say. These are improper. But from the very beginning, it seems to me, stories have indeed been meant to be enjoyed, to appeal to that part of us which enjoys good form and good shape and good sound. Still I think that behind it all is a desire to make our experience in the world better, to make our passage through life easier. Once you talk about making things better youre talking about politics. I believe that it is impossible to write anything in Africa without some kind of commitment, some kind of message, some kind of protest. In my definition I am a protest writer, with restraint. Even those early novels that look like very gentle re-creations of the pastwhat they were saying, in effect, was that we had a past. That was the protest, because there were people who thought we didnt have a past. What I was doing was to say politely that we didhere it is. So commitment is nothing new. Commitment runs through my work. In fact, I should say that all of our writers, whether theyre aware of it or not, are committed writers. The whole pattern of life demanded that one should protest, that you should put in a word for your history, your traditions, your religion, and so on.7 The question of involvement in politics is really a matter of definition. I think it is quite often misunderstood. I have never proposed that every artist become an activist in the way we have always understood political activity. Some will, because thats the way they are. Others will not, and we must not ask anyone to do more than is necessary for them to perform their task. At the same time it is important to state that words have the power to hurt, even to denigrate and oppress others. Before I am accused of prescribing a way in which a writer should write, let me say that I do think that decency and civilization would insist that the writer take sides with the powerless. Clearly there is no moral obligation to write in any particular way. But there is a moral obligation, I think, not to ally oneself with power against the powerless. An artist, in my definition of the word, would not be someone who takes sides with the emperor against his powerless subjects.8 If one didnt realize the world was complex, vast, and diverse, one would write as if the world were one little county, and this would make us poor, and we would have impoverished the novel and our stories. The reality of today, different as it is from the reality of my society one hundred years ago, is and can be important if we have the energy and the inclination to challenge it, to go out and engage with its peculiarities, with the things that we do not understand. The real danger is the tendency to retreat into the obvious, the tendency to be frightened by the richness of the world and to clutch what we always have understood. The writer is often faced with two choicesturn away from the reality of lifes intimidating complexity or conquer its mystery by battling with it. The writer who chooses the former soon runs out of energy and produces elegantly tired fiction.9 The Igbo believe that art, religion, everything, the whole of life are embodied in the art of the masquerade. It is dynamic. It is not allowed to remain stationary. For instance, museums are unknown among the Igbo people. They do not even contemplate the idea of having something like a canon with the postulate: This is how this sculpture should be made, and once its made it should be venerated. No, the Igbo people want to create these things again and again, and every generation has a chance to execute its own model of art. So theres no undue respect for what the last generation did, because if you do that too much it means that there is no need for me to do anything, because its already been done.10  One thing that I find a little worrying, though, is the suggestion that perhaps what was done in the 1960s, when African literature suddenly came into its own, was not as revolutionary as we make it out to be. That African literature without a concerted effort on the part of the writers of that era would still have found its voice. You find the same kind of cynicism among young African Americans who occasionally dismiss the contributions of the civil rights activists of that same period. Many of these same critics clearly did not know (or maybe do not want to be told) what Africa was like in the 1940s, back when there was no significant literature at all. There are people who do not realize that it was a different world than the world of today, one which is far more open. This openness and the opportunities that abound for a young intellectual setting out to carve a writing career for himor herself are in fact partly a result of the work of that literature, the struggles of that era. So even though nobody is asking the new writer or intellectual to repeat the stories, the literary agenda or struggles of yesteryear, it is very important for them to be aware of what our literature achieved, what it has done for us, so that we can move forward. As I write this I am aware that there are people, many friends of mine, who feel that there are too many cultures around. In fact, I heard someone say that they think some of these cultures should be put down, that there are just too many. We did not make the world, so there is no reason we should be quarreling with the number of cultures there are. If any group decides on its own that its culture is not worth talking about, it can stop talking about it. But I dont think anybody can suggest to another person, Please drop your culture; lets use mine. Thats the height of arrogance and the boast of imperialism. I think cultures know how to fight their battles; cultures know how to struggle. It is up to the owners of any particular culture to ensure it survives, or if they dont want it to survive, they should act accordingly, but I am not going to recommend that. My position, therefore, is that we must hear all the stories. That would be the first thing. And by hearing all the stories we will find points of contact and communication, and the world story, the Great Story, will have a chance to develop. Thats the only precaution I would suggestthat we not rush into announcing the arrival of this international, this great world story, based simply on our knowledge of one or a few traditions. For instance, in America there is really very little knowledge of the literature of the rest of the world. Of the literature of Latin America, yes. But thats not all that different in inspiration from that of America, or of Europe. One must go further. You dont even have to go too far in terms of geographyyou can start with the Native Americans and listen to their poetry.  Most writers who are beginners, if they are honest with themselves, will admit that they are praying for a readership as they begin to write. But it should be the quality of the craft, not the audience, that should be the greatest motivating factor. For me, at least, I can declare that when I wrote Things Fall Apart I couldnt have told anyone the day before it was accepted for publication that anybody was going to read it. There was no guarantee; nobody ever said to me, Go and write this, we will publish it, and we will read it; it was just there. But my brother-in-law, who was not a particularly voracious reader, told me that he read the novel through the night and it gave him a terrible headache the next morning. And I took that as an encouraging endorsement!11 The triumph of the written word is often attained when the writer achieves union and trust with the reader, who then becomes ready to be drawn deep into unfamiliar territory, walking in borrowed literary shoes so to speak, toward a deeper understanding of self or society, or of foreign peoples, cultures, and situations.12 1966 absentminded our thoughtless days sat at dire controls and played indolently slowly downward in remote subterranean shaft a diamond-tipped drill point crept closer to residual chaos to rare artesian hatred that once squirted warm blood in Gods face confirming His first disappointment in Eden1 January 15, 1966, Coup On Saturday, January 15, 1966, a pivotal day in the history of Nigeria, members of the Society of Nigerian Authors happened to be gathered for a meeting. The venue was an office building on Kingsway Road in Ikoyi, Lagos. There were about ten of us living in Lagos at the time: John Pepper Clark-Bekederemo (aka J. P. Clark), Wole Soyinka, Onuora Nzekwu, and a few others. A few members were sitting at a table that looked out onto the Lagos Lagoon. We were engaged in polite conversation, delaying the start of the meeting as some of our members trickled in. It happened that my new novel, A Man of the People, was about to be published in London, and I was communicating with my publisher, Heinemann. I knew that the book was going to be problematic for me because of its criticism of Nigerian politicsvery severe criticism. The novel, after all, climaxes in a military coup. I had sent one copy of the novel to J. P. Clark on a Wednesday, two days earlier. When J.P. arrived at the meeting his voice rang out from several hundred feet away. Chinua, you know, you are a prophet. Everything in this book has happened except a coup! That very evening, unbeknownst to us, a military coup was being launched that would change Nigeria forever. The next day I got a message from Heinemann, a cable or telex, asking me whether they should go ahead and publish the book. Why would they send this message? I wondered. I was unaware that a coup had happened the night before. I told the gentleman who carried this messageI think from the British embassy to tell my publisher to go ahead and publish the novel. I was not particularly afraid, even though I had concerns. I thought, Who was likely to misunderstand? My sentiment changed from incredulity to dread when we heard details and the surrounding events of the coup. In those days we went to work on Saturdays and worked till noon. When I got to my office that Saturday there were soldiers everywhere, surrounding Broadcasting House. The soldiers stopped me and interrogated me until they were satisfied that I worked there, and then let me pass through. The announcement of a coup on the radio had not been made. Some people had their suspicions, because soldiers in military vehicles were seen being deployed throughout the city, and roadblocks with barbed wire were being erected everywhere. News began to seep through. We heard that the prime minister was missing. Then came news from Kaduna that the Sardauna,1 Sir Ahmadu Bello, the most powerful of the premiers, had been killed. We then heard that Samuel Akintola, the premier of Western Nigeria, had also been killed. Those of us working in broadcasting in the coming days would get a more detailed list of those killed, imprisoned, or detained during the coup. These events thrust Nigeria into a state of shock for a long time.  Nigeria was not ready or willing to face her problems. If her leaders had approached their duty with humility, they all might have realized long before the coup that the country was in deep trouble. Nigeria was rocked by one crisis after another in the years that followed independence. First the Nigerian census crisis of 196364 shook the nation, then the federal election crisis of 1964, which was followed by the Western Nigeria election crisis of 1965which threatened to split the country at its seams. At that point most of us, the writers at least, knew that something was very wrong in Nigeria. A fix was long overdue. When the artists imagination clashes with lifes very reality it creates a heavy conundrum. The story Nigeria had of herself was that something like a military coup would never happen; Nigeria was too stable for that. We were utterly unprepared for such an event, and for the magnitude of the dislocation that ensued. Despite my fictional warning I never expected or wanted the form of violent intervention that became the military coup of January 15, 1966. I had hoped that the politicians would sort things out for our new nation. Any confidence we had that things could be put right was smashed as we watched elements from the military take control. The coup was led by a group of junior officers, most of them Igbo, and it would be known widely as the Nzeogwu coup after Major Chukwuma Nzeogwu, the ringleader, who was from the northern city of Kaduna. That night of January 15, 1966, is something Nigeria has never really recovered from. The Dark Days On January 16, 1966, the day after the Nzeogwu coup, my wife, Christie, took our first child, Chinelo, to the movies to catch the matinee. Chinelo was full of energyalways running all over the place. My wifes doctor, Dr. Okoronkwo Ogan, who became our daughters godfather, called her quicksilver.1 On their way home, my wife decided to drop by and see me in the office, so that our daughter could tell me all about the movie they had watched. I believe it was the Disney classic Dumbo, about the flying elephant. As they approached the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation they saw the soldiers around but did not know what was happening. They were not scared, even though they found the commotion a bit peculiar. As they walked to my office someone yelled at my wife: Where are you going? Dont you know what is happening? So she walked more briskly, because she wanted to find out whether I was alive. A soldier stopped them and asked them to leave. They returned home and tuned into the radio station to find out what was going on. People were standing on the streets in small groups, listening to the radios of street newspaper vendors. There had been a coup, the radio announcers said, at which point there was an initial period of spontaneous, overt jubilation. The story of the coup and how it happened started leaking out, first from the military barracks and then from the international media. There was a great deal of anxiety among the general populace. Everyone wanted to find out exactly what had happened in Kaduna, Lagos, Ibadan, and elsewhere the night before, though apparently not much action had been seen in Enugu, the capital of the Eastern Region. The initial vacuum of information was filled with gossip, innuendo, and fabricated accounts that magnified the confusion throughout the country. A second story got around that the military coup, which at first had been so well received, was in fact a sinister plot by the ambitious Igbos of the East to seize control of Nigeria. In a country in which tribalism was endemic, the rumor of an Igbo coup began to find acceptance. Before long many people were persuaded that their spontaneous jubilation in January had been a mistake. A Nigerian poet who had dedicated a new book to the heroes of January 1966 had second thoughts after the countercoup of July, and he sent a frantic cable to his publishers to remove the dedication. Those who knew Nigeria were not very surprised, because part of the way to respond to confusion in Nigeria is to blame those from the other ethnic group or the other side of the country. One found some ethnic or religious element supporting whatever one was trying to make sense of. This angle grew stronger and stronger as the days passed, mainly because the state of confusion was not really dispelled satisfactorily by the authorities. The weeks following the coup saw Easterners attacked both randomly and in an organized fashion. There seemed to be a lust for revenge, which meant an excuse for Nigerians to take out their resentment on the Igbos who led the nation in virtually every sectorpolitics, education, commerce, and the arts. This group, the Igbo, that gave the colonizing British so many headaches and then literally drove them out of Nigeria was now an open target, scapegoats for the failings and grievances of colonial and post-independence Nigeria. It was a desperate time. Soldiers were being used by elements in power to commit a number of crimes against Igbos, Nigerian citizens. Military officers were rounding people up and summarily executing them, particularly in the North, we were told by victims fleeing the pogroms. There was a story of hoodlums looking to hunt down and kill Dr. Okechukwu Ikejiani, who was the chairman of the Nigerian Coal Corporation.2 Dr. Ikejiani escaped the grasp of these thugs by dressing up as a woman and crossing the Nigeria border to Dahomey (todays Republic of Benin)! In Lagos, where we lived, soldiers were also used in targeted raids of certain peoples homes, including our own. It happened that my wife and I had moved recently from Milverton Street to Turnbull Road, after my promotion to director of external broadcasting. Fortunately for us the soldiers went to Milverton Street, to our old house, to search for me. Some may wonder why soldiers would be after me so fervently. As I mentioned, it happened that I had just written A Man of the People, which forecast a military coup that overthrows a corrupt civilian government. Clearly a case of fact imitating fiction and nothing else, but some military leaders believed that I must have had something to do with the coup and wanted to bring me in for questioning. Eventually my family and I left our Turnbull Road house, a painful decision. We had moved into it after we were married. It was located in Ikoyi, a nice section of town, overlooking the lagoon. I remember receiving important visitors in our home, such as the great African American poet Langston Hughes, who stopped by during one of his famous African tours. I have a favorite picture of the two of us from that period, standing near a palm tree on the lawn of that lovely residence. We found refuge in an old friends houseFrank Cawson, the British Council representative in Lagos, whose intervention literally saved our lives. He housed us for a number of days. Mr. Cawson had been the British Council representative in Accra, Ghana, and had invited me to give a lecture there before he came to Lagos. I delivered a lecture, entitled, The African Writer and the English Language. So when Mr. Cawson was transferred to Nigeria, he was already known to me. He was monitoring local and international radio and newspapers to get a sense of what was happening. He took a number of precautionary steps to enhance our safety. First he took his car out of the garage and put our own there instead, so that no one would see it. It was a very tense, anxiety-plagued period for my wife and me and our two children, Chinelo, who was five years old, and Ike, who was two. Making matters worse was the fact that Frank Cawson was quite illI think with malaria. For about a week, lying hidden in Mr. Cawsons house in Lagos, I still simply thought that things had temporarily gotten out of hand, and that everything would soon be all right. Then, suddenly, I discovered that I had been operating on a false and perhaps nave basis all along. The soldiers located us after we had been hiding about a week. It became clear to me that I had to send my family away. As many of us packed our belongings to return east some of the people we had lived with for years, some for decades, jeered and said, Let them [Igbos] go; food will be cheaper in Lagos. That kind of experience is very powerful. It is something I could not possibly forget. I realized suddenly that I had not been living in my home; I had been living in a strange place. There were more and more reports of massacres, and not only in the North, but also in the West and in Lagos. People were hounded out of their homes, as we were in Lagos, and returned to the East. We expected to hear something from the intellectuals, from our friends. Rather, what we heard was, Oh, they had it coming to them, or words to that effect. There were many others from other parts of Nigeria who did not jeer but suffered with us at this sudden discovery that a section of the large, diverse Nigerian family was not welcome in this new country. A lot of this hot-blooded anger was fanned by British intellectuals and some radical Northern elements in places like Ahmadu Bello University. They were aided by a few in the expatriate population from outside Nigeria, who easily influenced the mostly self-satisfied and docile Northern leadership to activate a weapon that has been used repeatedly in Nigerias short historya fringe element known as area boys or the rent-a-crowd typesto attack Igbos in an orgy of blood. As we reached the brink of full-blown war it became clear to me that the chaos enveloping all of us in Nigeria was due to the incompetence of the Nigerian ruling class. They clearly had a poor grasp of history and found it difficult to appreciate and grapple with Nigerias ethnic and political complexity. This clique, stunted by ineptitude, distracted by power games and the pursuit of material comforts, was unwilling, if not incapable, of saving our fledgling new nation.  I arranged to smuggle Christie and the children out of Lagos on a cargo ship from the port. Christie reports that it was one of the most horrendous voyages she has ever undertaken. She remembers the seasickness heightened on this particular trip as a result of her pregnancy. She and the children and other refugees from the bloodshed were placed in a section of the ship that was in the open, without any shelter from the elements. There was vomiting, nausea; it was just awful. After the harrowing sea journey, Christie, Chinelo, and Ike were received safely in Port Harcourt in Eastern Nigeria by her brother, Dr. Samuel Okoli, an obstetrician-gynecologist, who served gallantly during the war effort. I found it difficult to come to terms with the fact that Nigeria was disintegrating, that I had to leave my house, leave Lagos, leave my job. So I decided to sneak back into our Turnbull Road residence and return to work. People were disappearing right and left. . . . There was a media report of someone from the senior service whose body was found the night before. At this point the killings had reached the peak figure of hundreds a week. Victor Badejo, the director general of Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation, saw me on the premises, stopped me, and said, What are you still doing here? And then he said, Life has no duplicate3 and provided further clarification of the situation. Badejo confirmed a story I had heard of drunken soldiers who came to my office wanting to find out which was more powerful, their guns or my pen. He was quite anxious on my behalf and advised me to leave my Turnbull Road residence immediately.4 Philip Ume-Ezeoke was the controller of education programming at the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation. We were both from the Eastern Region and got on rather well. He and I decided together that the time had come for us to travel back to the East. Relatives were sending messages from there begging their loved ones in Lagos to return. There were a number of people like us who did not really want to see this come about . . . did not believe this was happening. Ume-Ezeoke came to my house and suggested we go in a two-car convoy back to Eastern Nigeria. We agreed on a time that we would leave Lagos the following morning. I got to Ume-Ezeokes house the next morning very early, exactly at the agreed-upon time, but no one was there. He was already gone. Unfortunately, Philip Ume-Ezeoke is no longer alive. If he were, it would be interesting to know what happened. In any case, I set out on my own, wondering what would come up at any point. The highway was full of police roadblocks along the way. I was stopped once or twice and had to show my paperswhat Nigerians call my particulars.  I was one of the last to flee Lagos. I simply could not bring myself to accept that I could no longer live in my nations capital, although the facts clearly said so. My feeling toward Nigeria was one of profound disappointment. Not only because mobs were hunting down and killing innocent civilians in many parts, especially in the North, but because the federal government sat by and let it happen. The problems of the Nigerian federation were well-known, but I somehow had felt that perhaps this was part of a nations maturation, and that given time we would solve our problems. Then, suddenly, this incredible, horrific experience happenednot just to a few people but to millions, together. I could not escape the impact of this trauma happening to millions of people at the same time. Suddenly I realized that the only valid basis for existence is one that gives security to you and your people. It is as simple as that.5 When I finally got to Benin City, which is located roughly halfway from Lagos to Igbo land in the Mid-West Region, there was a distinct atmospheric change. The fact that the Mid-West was a neighbor of the East meant that at this point there were Mid-Western Igbo policemen. It is important to recall that during this period in Nigerian history the Igbos had large numbers in the police force but not in the army, where their numbers were concentrated in the officer corps. Crowds of policemen recognized me when I got to Benin City and cheered, saying, Oga, thank you!, and let me through to continue my journey without incident to Onitsha Bridge, and over the Niger River to the East. It is pertinent to note that within the military there had been for at least half a decade preceding the coup a great sense of alienation from and disillusionment with the political class in Nigeria. They shared that feeling with a growing number of ordinary Nigerians, and clearly with the writers and intellectuals. The political class, oblivious of the growing disenchantment permeating literally every strata of Nigerian society, was consumed with individual and ethnic pursuits, and with the accumulation of material and other resources. Corruption was widespread, and those in power were using every means at their disposal, including bribery, intimidation, and blackmail, to cling to power.6 Many within the military leadership were increasingly concerned that they were being asked to step in and set things right politically. In the first six years of its post-independence existence Nigeria found itself calling on the armed forces to quell two Tiv riots in the Middle Belt, crush the 1964 general strike, and reestablish order following regional elections in the Western Region in 1965. In hindsight, it seems as though President Azikiwe may have been aware of the sand shifting beneath the feet of the political class, and he tried to gain the support of the military brass during the constitutional crisis following the 1964 federal general election. The failure of Azikiwes attempt perhaps should have been the first sign to many of us that trouble lay ahead for our young nation.7 BENIN ROAD Speed is violence Power is violence Weight violence The butterfly seeks safety in lightness In weightless, undulating flight But at a crossroads where mottled light From old trees falls on a brash new highway Our separate errands collide I come power-packed for two And the gentle butterfly offers Itself in bright yellow sacrifice Upon my hard silicon shield.1 A History of Ethnic Tension and Resentment I have written in my small book entitled The Trouble with Nigeria that Nigerians will probably achieve consensus on no other matter than their common resentment of the Igbo. The origin of the national resentment of the Igbo is as old as Nigeria and quite as complicated. But it can be summarized thus: The Igbo culture, being receptive to change, individualistic, and highly competitive, gave the Igbo man an unquestioned advantage over his compatriots in securing credentials for advancement in Nigerian colonial society. Unlike the Hausa/Fulani he was unhindered by a wary religion, and unlike the Yoruba he was unhampered by traditional hierarchies. This kind of creature, fearing no god or man, was custom-made to grasp the opportunities, such as they were, of the white mans dispensations. And the Igbo did so with both hands. Although the Yoruba had a huge historical and geographical head start, the Igbo wiped out their handicap in one fantastic burst of energy in the twenty years between 1930 and 1950.1 Had the Igbo been a minor ethnic group of a few hundred thousand their menace might have been easily and quietly contained. But their members ran in the millions. As in J. P. Clarks fine image of ants filing out of the wood, the Igbo moved out of their forest home, scattered, and virtually seized the floor.2 Paul Anber explains: With unparalleled rapidity, the Igbos advanced fastest in the shortest period of time of all Nigerias ethnic groups. Like the Jews, to whom they have frequently been likened, they progressed despite being a minority in the country, filling the ranks of the nations educated, prosperous upper classes. . . . It was not long before the educational and economic progress of the Igbos led to their becoming the major source of administrators, managers, technicians, and civil servants for the country, occupying senior positions out of proportion to their numbers. Particularly with respect to the Federal public service and the government statutory corporations, this led to accusations of an Igbo monopoly of essential services to the exclusion of other ethnic groups. The rise of the Igbo in Nigerian affairs was due to the self-confidence engendered by their open society and their belief that one man is as good as another, that no condition is permanent. It was not due, as non-Igbo observers have imagined, to tribal mutual aid societies. The Igbo Town Union that has often been written about was in reality an extension of the Igbo individualistic ethic. The Igbo towns competed among themselves for certain kinds of social achievement, like the building of schools, churches, markets, post offices, pipeborne water projects, roads, etc. They did not concern themselves with pan-Igbo unity nor were they geared to securing an advantage over non-Igbo Nigerians. The Igbo have no compelling traditional loyalty beyond town or village.3 There were a number of other factors that spurred the Igbos to educational, economic, and political success. The population density in Igbo land created a land hungera pressure on their low-fertility, laterite-laden soil for cultivation, housing, and other purposes, factors that led ultimately to migration to other parts of the nation: In Northern Nigeria there were less than 3,000 Igbos in 1921; by 1931 the number had risen to nearly 12,000 and by 1952 to over 130,000.4 The coastal branches of the Yoruba nation had some of the earliest contact with the European missionaries and explorers as a consequence of their proximity to the shoreline and their own dedication to learning. They led the entire nation in educational attainment from the late nineteenth to the early twentieth centuries. By the time the Church Mission Society and a number of Roman Catholic orders had crossed the Niger River and entered Igbo land, there had been an explosion in the numbers of young Igbo students enrolled in school. The increase was so exponential in such a short time that within three short decades the Igbos had closed the gap and quickly moved ahead as the group with the highest literacy rate, the highest standard of living, and the greatest proportion of citizens with postsecondary education in Nigeria. The Igbo, for the most part (at least until recently), respected the education that the colonizers had brought with them. There was not only individual interest in the white mans knowledge, but family, community, and regional interest. It would not surprise an observer that the Igbos absorbed western education as readily as they responded to urbanization.5 I will be the first to concede that the Igbo as a group is not without its flaws. Its success can and did carry deadly penalties: the dangers of hubris, overweening pride, and thoughtlessness, which invite envy and hatred or, even worse, that can obsess the mind with material success and dispose it to all kinds of crude showiness. There is no doubt at all that there is a strand in contemporary Igbo behavior that can offend by its noisy exhibitionism and disregard for humility and quietness.6 Having acknowledged these facts,7 any observer can clearly see how the competitive individualism and the adventurous spirit of the Igbo could have been harnessed by committed leaders for the modernization and development of Nigeria. Nigerias pathetic attempt to crush these idiosyncrasies rather than celebrate them is one of the fundamental reasons the country has not developed as it should and has emerged as a laughingstock.8 The ploy in the Nigerian context was simple and crude: Get the achievers out and replace them with less qualified individuals from the desired ethnic background so as to gain access to the resources of the state. This bizarre government strategy transformed the federal civil service, corporations, and universities into centers for ethnic bigotry and petty squabbles.9 It was in this toxic environment that Professor Eni Njoku, an Igbo who was vice chancellor of the University of Lagos, was forced out of office. An exasperated Kenneth Onwuka Dike, an ethnic Igbo and the vice chancellor of the University of Ibadan facing similar bouts of tribal small-mindedness, famously lamented during this crisis that intellectuals were the worst peddlers of tribalism.10 One of the first signs I saw of an Igbo backlash came in the form of a 1966 publication from Northern Nigeria called The Nigerian Situation: Facts and Background. In it the Igbo were cast as an assertive group that unfairly dominated almost every sector of Nigerian society. No mention was made of the culture of educational excellence imbibed from the British that pervaded Igbo society and schools at the time. Special attention instead was paid to the manpower distribution within the public services, where 45 percent of the managers were Igbo and it is threatening to reach 60 percent by 1968. Moreover, regrettably though, [the] Norths future contribution11 was credited with only 10 percent of the existing posts. Of particular dismay to the authors of the report were the situations in the Nigerian Railway Corporation, in which over half of the posts were occupied by Igbos; the Nigerian Ports Authority; and the Nigerian Foreign Service, in which over 70 percent of the posts were held by Igbos. Probably the pettiest of the accusations was the lamentation over the academic success of Easterners who graduated in larger numbers in the 196566 academic year than their counterparts from the West, Mid-West, and North.12 By the time the government of the Western Region also published a white paper outlining the dominance of the ethnic Igbo in key government positions in the Nigerian Railway Corporation and the Nigerian Ports Authority, the situation for ethnic Igbos working in Western Nigeria in particular, but all over Nigeria in general, had become untenable. This government-sanctioned environment of hate and resentment created by self-serving politicians resulted in governmentsupervised persecutions, terminations, and dismissals of Nigerian citizens based on their ethnicity. In most other nations the success of an ethnic group as industrious as the Igbo would stimulate healthy competition and a renaissance of learning and achievement. In Nigeria it bred deep resentment and both subtle and overt attempts to dismantle the structures in place for meritocracy in favor of mediocrity, under the cloak of a need for federal charactera morally bankrupt and deeply corrupt Nigerian form of the far more successful affirmative action in the United States.13 The denial of merit is a form of social injustice that can hurt not only the individuals directly concerned but ultimately the entire society. The motive for the original denial may be tribal discrimination, but it may also come from sexism, from political, religious, or some other partisan consideration, or from corruption and bribery. It is unnecessary to examine these various motives separately; it is sufficient to state that whenever merit is set aside by prejudice of whatever origin, individual citizens as well as the nation itself are victimized.14, 15 The Army Before I go further an effort should be made to explain the nature of the dynamics at work within the Nigerian military at the time of the January 15, 1966, coup and the events that followed. Striking a balance between a level of detail that will satisfy readers who still feel the impact of these events deeply and that which will be palatable, if not to say comprehensible, to a less wellinformed reader is an impossibility, but I will strive to do so nonetheless. Historians have argued incessantly about the makeup of the January 15, 1966, coup and its meaning. It was led by the so-called five majors, a cadre of relatively junior officers whose front man of sorts was Chukwuma Nzeogwu. Very few people outside military circles (with the exception of the poet Christopher Okigbo) knew very much about him. What I heard of him was what his friends or those who happened to know him were telling us. He seemed to be a distant, mysterious figure.1 Nzeogwu had a reputation as a disciplined, no-nonsense, nonsmoking, nonphilandering teetotaler, and as an anticorruption crusader. This reputation, we were told, served him well as the chief instructor at the Nigerian Military Training College (NMTC) in Kaduna,2 and in recruiting military intellectuals. In the wee hours of January 15, 1966, in a broadcast to the nation, Nzeogwu sought to explain the coup attempt. It happened that some journalists had approached him to clarify the situation. Apparently the plan of the coup plotters was to take control of the various military commands in Kaduna, Lagos, and Enugu and to make a radio announcement from Lagos. Unbeknown to Nzeogwu, who was still in Kaduna, the Lagos operation had failed, and most information available to the population was coming from the BBC. Nzeogwu hastily put together a speech that became notorious for its attacks on the political class, bribery, and corruption.3 But by killing Sir Ahmadu Bello, Nzeogwu and the other coup plotters had put themselves on a collision course with the religious, ethnic, and political ramifications of such an action, something they had clearly not thought through sufficiently.4 Superficially it was understandable to conclude that this was indeed an Igbo coup. However, scratch a little deeper and complicating factors are discovered: One of the majors was Yoruba, and Nzeogwu himself was Igbo in name only. Not only was he born in Kaduna, the capital of the Muslim North, he was widely known as someone who saw himself as a Northerner, spoke fluent Hausa and little Igbo, and wore the Northern traditional dress when not in uniform. In the end the Nzeogwu coup was crushed by the man who was the highest-ranking Igbo officer in the Nigerian army, Major-General Aguiyi-Ironsi.5 We were to learn later that Aguiyi-Ironsi was also on the list of those to be murdered. Ironsi got wind of the plot and mounted a successful resistance in Lagos, ultimately breaking the back of the coup.6 Major-General Aguiyi-Ironsi emerged as Nigerias new head of state in late May 1966. In a broadcast to the nation on May 24, 1966, Ironsi banned all political parties and imposed what he called Decree No. 34 on a bewildered country. The widely unpopular decree eliminated Nigerias federal structure and put in place a unitary republic, which seemed to threaten more local patronage networks. For the first time in history a federal military government was in control of Nigeria.7 There was growing anger and dissatisfaction among officers from Northern Nigeria, who wanted revenge for what they saw8 as an Igbo coup. Aguiyi-Ironsi, a mild-mannered person, was reluctant to execute the Nzeogwu coup plotters, who were serving stiff prison sentences. Nzeogwu was imprisoned at the Kirikiri Maximum Security Prison in Lagos. It didnt help matters that all the coup plotters were eventually transferred to the Eastern Region, which at that time was under the jurisdiction of Colonel Odumegwu Ojukwu, son of Sir Louis Odumegwu Ojukwu.9 Countercoup and Assassination Throughout this time there was a sense of great unease and tension across the country, and multiple rumors of military insurrection in the offing. Prior to Major-General Aguiyui-Ironsis ascension in May 1966, there were reports of riots in Northern Nigeria. There are many reports of the genesis of these spontaneous riots.1 Marauding Northern youths armed with machetes, knives, and other instruments of death attacked unsuspecting civilians, mostly Igbos. The mainly Igbo and other Easterners who fled to the Eastern Region from the North during the May riots were persuaded to return to their livelihoods in the North by Aguiyi-Ironsi, the head of state, and Odumegwu Ojukwu, the military governor of Eastern Nigeria. These calls were predicated upon assurances from the Northern Regions governor, Hassan Katsina, that no harm would befall them.2 By June several meetings had taken place among the Northern Nigerian ruling elite. They sent representatives to meet with now general Ironsi, handing him a list of their demands that included the revocation of the unpopular Decree 34; the courts-martial and punishment of the leaders of the January 15, 1966, coup; and the discontinuation of any plans to investigate the underpinnings of the May 1966 massacres in the North.3 Ironsi was alarmed that Northern leaders had been meeting without his knowledge for several months, and he sensed a great deal of anger bubbling beneath the surface. He made the ill-advised determination that, as Nigerias head of state, he could appease and soothe concerns if he met with the leaders of the regions.4 Ironsi embarked on a nationwide tour to calm growing fears of a permanently fractured nation and to promote his notion of a unitary republic. He stopped over in Ibadan as the guest of the military governor of Western Nigeria, Lieutenant Colonel Adekunle Fajuyi. A close friend and confidant, Fajuyi made Ironsi aware of rumors of a pending mutiny in the army.5 There are several accounts of what transpired next. What I was told by those close to the army was that on July 29, 1966, Ironsi was arrested by Nigerian army captain Theophilus Y. Danjuma, a Northerner, who wanted to know if Ironsi was linked to the death of the Sardauna of Sokoto. There are divergent accounts of what happened next. What is well known is that in a matter of hours the bullet-ridden bodies of Ironsi and Fajuyi were discovered in the bush.6 These executions would prove to be part of a larger and particularly bloody coup by Northern officers led by Murtala Muhammed.7 The Pogroms Looking back, the naively idealistic coup of January 15, 1966, proved a terrible disaster. It was interpreted with plausibility as a plot by the ambitious Igbo of the East to take control of Nigeria from the Hausa/Fulani North. Six months later, I watched horrified as Northern officers carried out a revenge coup in which they killed Igbo officers and men in large numbers. If it had ended there, the matter might have been seen as a very tragic interlude in nation building, a horrendous tit for tat. But the Northerners turned on Igbo civilians living in the North and unleashed waves of brutal massacres that Colin Legum of The Observer (UK) was the first to describe as a pogrom. Thirty thousand civilian men, women, and children were slaughtered, hundreds of thousands were wounded, maimed, and violated, their homes and property looted and burnedand no one asked any questions. A Sierra Leonean living in Northern Nigeria at the time wrote home in horror: The killing of the Igbos has become a state industry in Nigeria.1 What terrified me about the massacres in Nigeria was this: If it was only a question of rioting in the streets and so on, that would be bad enough, but it could be explained. It happens everywhere in the world. But in this particular case a detailed plan for mass killing was implemented by the governmentthe army, the policethe very people who were there to protect life and property. Not a single person has been punished for these crimes. It was not just human nature, a case of somebody hating his neighbor and chopping off his head. It was something far more devastating, because it was a premeditated plan that involved careful coordination, awaiting only the right spark. Throughout the country at this time, but particularly in Igbo intellectual circles, there was much discussion of the difficulties of coexisting in a nation with such disparate peoples and religious and cultural backgrounds. As early as October 1966, some were calling for outright war.2 Most of us, however, were still hoping for a peaceful solution. Many talked of a confederation, though few knew how it would look. In the meantime, the Eastern Region was tackling the herculean task of resettling the refugees who were pouring into the East in the hundreds of thousands. It was said at the time that the number of displaced Nigerian citizens fleeing from other parts of the nation back to Eastern Nigeria was close to a million. PENALTY OF GODHEAD The old mans bed of straw caught a flame blown from overnight logs by harmattans incendiary breath. Defying his age and sickness he rose and steered himself smoke-blind to safety. A nimble rat appeared at the door of his hole looked quickly to left and right and scurried across the floor to nearby farmlands. Even roaches that grim tenantry that nothing discourages fled their crevices that day on wings they only use in deadly haste. Household gods alone frozen in ritual black with blood of endless tribute festooned in feathers perished in the blazing pyre of that hut.1 The Aburi Accord The absence of a concerted plan to address the eruption of violence throughout Nigeria against Easterners, mainly Igbos, and the inaction around the refugee problem amplified the anger and tensions between the federal government, now led by Lieutenant Colonel Yakubu Gowon, and the Eastern Region. Calls in the East for independence grew louder, and threats from the deferral government grew more ominous, in a vicious cycle. A last-ditch summit was held from January 4 to January 5, 1967, to discuss the areas of conflict. Great optimism was expressed that this would be the instrument to bring lasting peace to Nigeria. Aburi, in Ghana, was chosen as the venue, as a concession to Ojukwu, who had asked for a neutral site outside Nigeria for this meeting, but also to impart a sense of impartiality and credibility to the summit. A document memorializing the areas of shared understanding was produced after two days of meetings. It would be known as the Aburi Accord.1 The gathering was attended by senior military and police officials2 and government secretaries.3 Topics for discussion included: a committee to work out a constitutional future for Nigeria; the back payment of salaries to Igbo government employees who were forced to leave their posts as a result of the disturbances; the need for a resolution renouncing the use of force; and the refusal of the Eastern Region to recognize Lieutenant Colonel Yakubu Gowon as supreme commander. The predicament of displaced persons following the pogroms in the North, the fate of soldiers involved in disturbances on January 15, 1966, and the planned distribution of power between the federal military government and the regional governments also required urgent attention.4 The goal of the Gowon-led Nigerian government was to emerge from these deliberations with Nigeria intact as a confederation of the regions. Many intellectuals and key members of Ojukwus cabinet in the East had been battling with solutions to these issues for months before the Aburi meetings, thinking through various possible answers to these key questions: What is a confederation? How would it work in the Nigerian setting? How much power would be delegated to the central federal government as opposed to the regions? In my estimation there was not as much rigorous thought given by Gowons federal cabinet and the powerful interests in the North. The two parties therefore left Aburi with very different levels of understanding of what a confederation meant and how it would work in Nigeria.5 By March 1967, two months after the summit in Aburi, Ghana, the Aburi Accord resolutions had yet to be implemented, and there was growing weariness in the East that Gowon had no intention of doing so. The government of the Eastern Region warned Gowon that his repeated failure to act on issues pertaining to Nigerian sovereignty could lead to secession. Gowon responded by issuing a decree, Decree 8, which called for the resurrection of the proposals for constitutional reform promulgated during the Aburi conference. But for reasons hard to explain other than as egotistical selfpreservation, members of the federal civil service galvanized themselves in energetic opposition to the agreements of the Aburi Accord. Seeing this development as a strategic political opening, the Yoruba leader, Obafemi Awolowo, the Wests political kingpin, heretofore nursing political trouble himself, including prior imprisonment for sedition, insisted that the federal government remove all Northern military troops garrisoned in Lagos, Ibadan, Abeokuta, and throughout the Western Regiona demand similar to those Ojukwu had made earlier, during the crisis.6 Awolowo warned Gowons federal government that if the Eastern Region left the federation the Western Region would not be far behind. This statement was considered sufficiently threatening by Gowon and the federal government to merit a complete troop withdrawal. There were increasing indications that Northern leaders never had any intention of implementing the settlement negotiated at Aburi. Ojukwu at this point was exasperated by what he saw as purposeful inaction from Gowon. During March through April 1967 he responded by instituting a systematic process that severed all Biafran ties to Nigeria: First he froze all official communication with Lagos, and he then followed this swiftly by disconnecting the Eastern regional governments administration and revenues from those of the federal government.7 I was in Lagos at the time. This event was so big that I cannot even in retrospect fully explain exactly what was happening. People were confused. I was confused myself. People who are confused in such a situation generally act with great desperation, emotionsome would say without logic. The movement toward a declaration of independence was very clear and sharp, because it was a result of a particular group of Nigerian citizens from the Eastern Region attempting to protect themselves from the great violence that had been organized and executed by arms of the government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. There was a strong sense that Nigeria was no longer habitable for the Igbo and many other peoples from Eastern Nigeria. That epiphany made us realize that Nigeria did not belong we, as Liberians would put it. This country belong we was the popular pidgin English mantra from their liberation struggle. That was not the case for Igbo people and many others from Eastern Nigeria. Nigeria did not belong to us. It was now clear to many of us that we, the Nigerian people, were not what we had thought we were. The Nigeria that meant so much to all of us was not reciprocating the affection we had for it. The country had not embraced us, the Igbo people and other Easterners, as full-fledged members of the Nigerian family. That was the predicament that the Igbo and many peoples from Eastern Nigeria found themselves in, and one that informed Ojukwus decisions, I believe, on the eve of civil war. The first part of May 1967 saw the visit of the National Reconciliation Commission (NRC) to Enugu, the capital of the Eastern Region. It was led by Chief Awolowo and billed as a last-minute effort at peace and as an attempt to encourage Ojukwu and Eastern leaders to attend peace talks at a venue suitable to the Easterners. Despite providing a friendly reception, many Igbo leaders referred to the visit disdainfully as the chop, chop, talk, talk, commission. A majority of Easterners by this time had grown contemptuous of Gowons federal government for its failure to bring the culprits of the mass murders in the North to justice, and they saw this as the latest in a series of insincere overtures. Senior Igbo military officers were also openly voicing their concern that Gowon was an illegitimate leader, because he was not the most senior officer in the chain of military command, and so had no right to be head of state. There were a number of distinguished and well-meaning Nigerians on the National Reconciliation Commission, but they were meeting with leaders of an emotionally and psychologically exhausted and disillusioned Igbo people. Many of these same Igbo leaders had been at the vanguard of independence struggles, and after years of spearheading the one Nigeria mantra, had very little to show for it. Clearly the situation had become untenable.8 On May 24, 1967, in the midst of this chaos, my wife went into labor. I sent my close friend, the poet Christopher Okigbo, to the hospital she had been admitted to to find out when the birth would take place, and then to call me at home, where I had briefly returned to rest and take a shower. In characteristic Okigbo fashion, he waited for the delivery, went to the nursery to see the baby, and then drove back to convey the news to me that my wife had delivered our third child, ChidiThere is a Godand that the way his baby locks were arranged, he looked like he had had a haircut and was ready to go to school! The babys arrival was a great joy, but I couldnt but feel a certain amount of apprehension for this infant, indeed for all of us, as the prospect of civil war cast a dark shadow over our lives. GENERATION GAP A sons arrival is the crescent moon too new too soon to lodge the mans returning. His feast of reincarnation must await the moons ripening at the naming ceremony of his grandson.1 The Nightmare Begins May the twenty-sixth saw an emergency meeting of Ojukwus special Advisory Committee of Chiefs and Elders in Enugu. The consensus was building across his cabinet that secession was the only viable path. On May 27, the Consultative Assembly mandated Colonel Ojukwu to declare, at the earliest practicable date, Eastern Nigeria a free sovereign and independent state by the name and title of the Republic of Biafra.1 It is crucial to note that the decision of an entire people, the Igbo people, to leave Nigeria, did not come from Ojukwu alone but was informed by the desires of the people and mandated by a body that contained some of the most distinguished Nigerians in history: Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, Nigerias, former governor-general and first ceremonial president; Dr. Michael I. Okpara and Sir Francis Ibiam, former premier and governor of Eastern Nigeria, respectively; and Supreme Court justice Sir Louis Mbanefo. Others included: the educator Dr. Alvan Ikoku; first republic minister Mr. K. O. Mbadiwe; as well as Mr. N. U. Akpan; Mr. Joseph Echeruo; Ekukinam-Bassey; Chief Samuel Mbakwe; Chief Jerome Udoji; and Chief Margaret Ekpo. In a speech to the nation on May 27, 1967, Gowon responded to Ojukwus assault on Nigerias unity and blatant revenue appropriation, as the federal government saw it, by calling a state of emergency and dividing the nation into twelve states.2 The official position from the federal government was that the creation of new states was an important move to foster unity and stability in Nigeria. Many suspect a more Machiavellian scheme at work here.3 Gowon, understanding inter-ethnic rivalry, suspected that dividing the East into four states, landlocking the Igbos into the East Central State and isolating the oil-producing areas of Nigeria outside Igbo land, would weaken secessionist sentiments in the region and empower minority groups that lived in oil-producing regions to stand up to what they had already dreaded for yearsthe prospects of Igbo domination.4 On May 30, 1967, Ojukwu, citing a variety of malevolent acts directed at the mainly Igbo Easternerssuch as the pogrom that claimed over thirty thousand lives; the federal governments failure to ensure the safety of Easterners in the presence of organized genocide; and the direct incrimination of the government in the murders of its own citizensproclaimed the independence of the Republic of Biafra from Nigeria, with the full backing of the Eastern House Constituent Assembly.5 By taking this action Ojukwu had committed us to full-blown war. Nigeria would never be the same again. The Nigeria-Biafra War To fully comprehend some of the competing positions during the Nigeria-Biafra War, it may be useful to begin with an examination of the local and international response to Biafra. THE BIAFRAN POSITION Beginning with the January 15, 1966, coup dtat, through the countercoup (staged mainly by Northern Nigerian officers, who murdered 185 Igbo officers1) and the massacre of thirty thousand Igbos and Easterners in pogroms that started in May 1966 and occurred over four monthsthe events of those months left millions of other future Biafrans and me feeling terrified. As we fled home to Eastern Nigeria to escape all manner of atrocities that were being inflicted upon us and our families in different parts of Nigeria, we saw ourselves as victims. When we noticed that the federal government of Nigeria did not respond to our call to end the pogroms, we concluded that a government that failed to safeguard the lives of its citizens has no claim to their allegiance and must be ready to accept that the victims deserve the right to seek their safety in other ways including secession. THE NIGERIAN ARGUMENT Nigerias position on Biafra, as I understand it, was hinged on the premise that if Biafra was allowed to secede then a number of other ethnic nationalities within Nigeria would follow suit.2 The Nigerian government, therefore, had to block Biafras secession to prevent the dissolution of Nigeria.3 THE ROLE OF THE ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY The Organization of African Unity (OAU) attempted to facilitate a number of peace meetings throughout the conflict. The umbrella body of sovereign African nations lacked credibility in this effort, in my opinion, as it harbored a strong One Nigeria bias from the very beginning of the war. The OAUs initial attempts to bring about peace talkswith meetings slated for Kampala, the capital of Uganda, in May 1968, and Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (at the OAU headquarters), in July 1968were ineffectual, and quickly disintegrated into fiascos of confusion.4 Facing international pressure and ridicule for failing to mediate effectively between the two warring parties,5 the OAUs consultative committee, which was made up of diplomats from Liberia, Ghana, Niger, Ethiopia, the Congo, and Camaroon, quickly re-sent invitations to the heads of state of Nigeria and Biafra Yakubu Gowon and Emeka Ojukwufor talks in Niamey, the capital of Niger, Nigerias northern neighbor.6 The summit, from what I later learned, became a case of sliding doors, with Gowon arriving and meeting with OAU principals ahead of the visit by Ojukwu. This treatment, meant to avoid confrontation, created the opposite effect and played no small part in diminishing the possible results that the first president of the Republic of Niger, Hamani Diori, was attempting to moderate. Professor Eni Njoku, the chief negotiator from Biafra, gallantly attempted to salvage what was left of that Nigeria-Biafra summit. He arranged a meeting with the leader of the Mid-West Region governments delegation, Chief Anthony Enahoro, that closed in an impasse.7 Ojukwu saw an opportunity to speak to a world audience at the next summit and agreed to attend; it was planned for August in the Ethiopian capital of Addis Ababa. He treated the gathered delegates to a speech of over two hours in length, and made the case for Biafran independence. He pointed out the great irony of the conflict, one that most of us in Biafra were already aware of: Having spearheaded the fight for Nigerian independence, Biafrans were later driven out by the rest of Nigeria, which waged war with the secessionist republic to conserve the very sovereignty of a nation (Nigeria) within whose walls Biafrans did not feel free, safe, or desired.8 In my opinion, Gowons absence at these meetings was telling, because it clearly suggested that he had a different agenda. This suspicion would be confirmed by his announcement of a surge in the Nigerian offensive that would increase exponentially the numbers dying and starving to death in the coming months. Most African countries adhered to the doctrines of the Organization of African Unity, which supported Nigeria for the same reasons espoused by the great powers: [A]llowing Biafra to secede would result in the destabilization of the entire continent.9 There were a few prominent nations in Africa that openly declared support for the Biafran cause for humanitarian, ethical, and moral reasons. Tanzanias Nyerere, one of the few survivors of the cold war tussle on the continent and a towering African statesman of the era, saw Biafras attempts to secede through the lens of the Jews seeking a homeland following the Holocaust in Nazi Germany and elsewhere in Europe.10 President Julius Nyerere was the first African head of state to recognize Biafra. His statement was published by the government printer in Tanzanias capital, Dar es Salam, on April 13, 1968. The day we heard that Tanzania had recognized Biafra was a fantastic day. I remember it vividly. I was sitting in my home with my wife; we were feeling very depressed, I dont know why, then suddenly somebody ran in and told us [the good news], and we said, Dont be silly, because we [did not believe him]. And then we heard [the same news] on the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], and my wife rushed up to tell me. She was so elated and said she was going to teach in Tanzania. Soon after that the streets were filled with people dancing and singing. For the first time in months you found dancing again, and the radio was playing Tanzanian music. People were reassured again that there was justice in the world, because we were already becoming quite cynical about the outside world, saying, Dont imagine anyone would come to your rescuethey know youre right, but it doesnt pay, so they wont do anything. We were more or less persuaded that we would have to fight on our own. [Nyereres] gesture meant nothing in military or material terms but it assured usthe effect it had on uswas electric.11 Other African leadersZambias Kenneth Kaunda, Gabons Omar Bongo, and Ivory Coasts Houphout-Boignyalso officially recognized Biafra. I later learned that Boigny was ideologically opposed to large African states and helped develop Frances well-planned decolonization policy in West Africa during his days as a parliamentarian in Paris.12 Boigny could have very well convinced a sympathetic Charles de Gaulle to support Biafra in order to achieve this ideological vision. Whatever his agenda was, it was to Houphout-Boignys Ivory Coast that Ojukwu would escape after the fall of Biafra in January 1970. There were other attempts to garner recognition for secessionist Biafra beyond the African continent, including wide international ones. Those who followed our story were aware of the shared history between Biafra and several Caribbean nations, where descendants of former Igbo slaves now lived. That historical connection was employed by Biafran emissaries with some success. Biafras diplomatic delegation, led by Dr. Okechukwu Ikejiani and Mr. Chukwuma Azikiwe, met with Dr. Franois Duvalier, president of Haiti, at the presidential palace in Port-au-Prince in February 1969. Following that visit, on March 22, 1969, Biafra secured the only non-African full diplomatic recognition from the Haitian people.13 The Triangle Game: The UK, France, and the United States1 Great Britains official response to the conflict, we were told, was predicated upon the fact that as our former colonial master, she would not stand for the breakup of one of her prized colonies, especially one she had worked hard to develop. Michael Leapmans report in The Independent in 1998 uncovers a far more cynical attitude. This paragraph confirmed what a number of us in Biafra already suspected about Harold Wilsons government: Cabinet papers for [1967], just released, show how the decision to continue arming Nigeria was not based on arguments for or against secession, or on the interests of its people, but on backing the likely winner. It is a case study in realpolitik. As one Commonwealth Office briefing document to the prime minister put it: The sole immediate British interest is to bring the [Nigerian] economy back to a condition in which our substantial trade and investment can be further developed.2 The BBCs Rick Fountain, in a story on Monday, January 3, 2000, called Secret Papers Reveal Biafra Intrigue, confirms that oil interests and competition between Britain, France, and the United States played a far more important role than the unified Nigeria position: At first Biafra was successful and this alarmed Britain, the former colonial power, anxious for its big oil holdings. It also interested the Soviet Union which saw a chance to increase its influence in West Africa. Both sent arms to boost the federal military government, under General Yakubu Gowon. But France, the other big former colonial power in the region, also took a hand. . . . Although Paris repeatedly denied arming the Biafrans, the newly released papers reveal intelligence reports showing that very large weapon shipments were reaching Biafra via two neighboring Francophone states, Ivory Coast and Gabon. The UK intelligence services warned that Soviet penetration was growing but that this did not much trouble Paris. The British reports say the French objective appears to be the breakup of Nigeria, which threatens, by its size and potential, to overshadow Frances client Francophone states in West Africa.3 I was aware from my contacts in England that many Britons were not pleased with the unsolicited leadership role Harold Wilsons government was playing in the bloody conflict in their former African colony. Emotional antipathy among the British public grew sufficiently as the conflict progressed to threaten the British Labor governments reelection chances. British journalists, writers, and intellectuals found the situation appalling as well. The Times of London complain[ed] that Britains Nigerian policy is a failure. . . . [T]here is a serious loss of touch in the conduct of British foreign policy.4 Harold Wilsons government soon found itself awash in a public relations nightmare at home and abroad.5 Wilson personally accused Ojukwu of attempting to garner sympathy by exploiting the casualties of a war to which his government was supplying arms!6 The bombing of civilian targets in Biafra by the Nigerian air force made the evening news and appeared in the major newspapers in Great Britain and stirred a hornets nest of outrage from the British people. Things were so tense that British dockworkers reportedly refused to load ships with British arms heading for Lagos, protesting that they were being used to kill Biafran babies. By the time the Nigerian air force shot down a Swedish Red Cross plane carrying humanitarian supplies and medicines to the sick and dying in Biafra, killing all aboard, there was, understandably, an outbreak of public anguish in Britain. That distress grew even worse shortly after this, with the awful news that the International Red Crosss director, Dr. August Lindt, and his aides were detained for nearly sixteen hours following their arrival in Lagos for a tour of humanitarian relief sites in Biafra and talks with Nigerian government officials.7 Across the English Channel, there was uplifting news. On July 31, 1968, Biafran diplomacy reached a milestone when the French Council of Ministers released a statement of approbation in support of Biafra, though it fell short of a full recognition of the secessionist republic: The Government [of France] considers that the bloodshed and suffering endured for over a year by the population of Biafra demonstrate their will to assert themselves as a people. Faithful to its principles, the French Government therefore considers that the present conflict should be solved on the basis of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and should include the setting in motion of appropriate international procedures.8 There was great excitement about this news in Biafra. Charles de Gaulle was a widely respected European leader who fought the Nazis valiantly during World War II from his base in Africa. I personally hoped that de Gaulles extensive knowledge of the continents history and political affairs would result in a sophisticated response to the crisis. I was encouraged when I heard that he was toying with the possibility of an outright statement of recognition of the Republic of Biafra. Also buoyed by this news, the Biafran head of state, Ojukwu, sent emissaries to Paris to lobby for full French credence, which we all mistakenly assumed was in the bag, but also for de Gaulle to help persuade the United States government to support the Biafran cause.9 I discovered later that Jacques Foccartdescribed as the most powerful man in the fifth republic by eminent French journalist Pierre Panwas the chief architect of French policy on the African continent. It was Foccart, I understand, who convinced the French parliament and de Gaulle to respond forcefully to the humanitarian disaster in Biafra.10 De Gaulle needed little persuasion. It was well-known that he bore a deep resentment of the British for what he saw as their unhelpful role in the French resistance (La Rsistance franaise) during World War II. Foccart, in his memoirs, informs us that Paris increased this Anglo-French rivalry by making aggressive diplomatic inroads into Ghana (a former British colony, which was surrounded by the former French colonies Benin, Togo, Burkina Faso, and Ivory Coast).11 Some Africanists believe that the Gaullist objective seemed to be to neutralize Ghana and diminish Nigeria as a regional power, and thereby contract Great Britains sphere of influence in West Africa. There were other French interests that later came to light: Paris wanted the French oil company Elf Aquitaine (which had a smaller market share in Nigerias oil industry) to have a greater footprint in the West African region consistent with Jacques Foccarts vision of French dominance.12 Whatever French motivations might have been, we were grateful in Biafra to be receiving their support. The United States of America was officially neutral during the conflict, which meant that it overtly supported neither the Nigerians nor the Biafrans.13 Those of us who wanted a more aggressive pro-Biafra stance from America, particularly on humanitarian grounds, were deeply disappointed, to put it mildly. Covertly, however, it was alleged that Washington under President Lyndon Johnson, before he left office in January 1968, was aiding the Nigerian war effort, in cooperation with the British. His government also had a number of runins with Biafran authorities over the role of the International Red Cross, Americas chief humanitarian organ for getting relief to the needy in Biafra, particularly after Gowon and his government imposed a blockade. Several months into the conflict, however, the Nixon administration, initially toeing the Johnson administrations line of neutral engagement in support of a one Nigeria, took a more proactive role and called for the cessation of hostilities. It was the government of the much maligned Richard Nixon that raised concerns about Nigerian military strategy and levied the charges of ethnic cleansing and genocide against the Nigerian forces. Despite what some of us saw as a cynical disinterest on the part of the American government, the American people were characteristically generous and magnanimous in spirit; they sent millions of humanitarian dollars to ease the suffering of the innocent caught between the belligerents.14 The leaders of the African American civil rights community were understandably horrified by the breakdown in law and order in Nigeria. The black intelligentsiacolleagues of Martin Luther King and Rosa Parkswere scholars of the nonviolence movement. On several occasions they came out forcefully against all forms of ferocity during the Nigeria-Biafra conflict, reacting with dismay at the magnitude of the human suffering in Biafra. They sent numerous forms of communication both to Ojukwu and Gowon to put an end to the bloody civil war. They were particularly appalled by the widespread hunger and starvation of Biafrans and by the millions of stranded refugees, all of which they reiterated was unacceptable to civilized world opinion.15 The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was particularly critical of the brutality of the conflict. The leader of the influential civil rights group, Roy Wilkins, implored the Nigerians especially to be more humane in their treatment of the Biafrans. He made a moral argument to end the food blockade by reminding Gowon that the need to save the lives of the thousands starving daily outweighed any military or political considerations.16 My admiration of the African American civil rights community was due not only to their moral positions on racial equality and the quest for peaceful coexistence of all peoples, but also on their arbitration during the Biafran strugglean intervention that brought succor to millions and helped place a moral lens on the atrocities taking place in my homeland. The Soviet Union had no significant presence in the region prior to 1966 but progressively took greater interest in Nigerian affairs after the Aguiyi-Ironsi coup dtat and the emergence of Nigeria as an important oil exporter. The initial neutrality of the USSRs Western rivals, including Britain and the United States in particular, I gather, provided an opening for the Soviets to send MiG fighters and technical assistance to the Nigerians, thereby including the region in the cold war theater.17 There were other reasons for the ever-growing Soviet presence in Nigeria in 1969.18 The Soviets had announced their intention to expand their bilateral trade agreements with Nigeria to include military and economic assistance. They had their eyes on a truly large prize: a contract to build one of the largest steel mills in all of Africa, at a cost of a then astonishing $120 million.19 That steel investment later became the Ajaokuta Steel Mill in northern Nigeriathe poster child of corruption and white elephant projects in Africathat went on to gulp over $4.6 billion of the Nigerian taxpayers money although very little steel was produced.20 The Portuguese, it should be made clear, had a more nebulous role with regard to Biafra. Portugal did not overtly back one side over the other during the conflict, which generated a great deal of talk and speculation. The extent of the Biafran relationship with Portugal was quite simply one that said, We will support you quietly. . . . Your planes can land in our territorySo Tom. Rajat Neogy of Transition magazine probed to find out from me whether there was more to our relationship. My position at the time was understandably passionate: I am not interested in what motives Portugal may have. If the devil himself had offered his air facilities we would have taken it, and I would have supported it. Portugal was very clever when it realized we were about to be exterminated, and said, You can land at my airport, and that, as far as I know, is the extent of Biafran association with Portugal. Portugal has not given us any arms. We buy arms on the black market. What we cannot get elsewhere, we try and make.21 The Chinese entered the contest late, albeit on the side of the Biafrans. Reports of Chinese technical and military assistance have been widely cited. Nevertheless, all told, the callous interference of the great powers led to great despair and a prolongation of the tragedy.22 The Writers and Intellectuals Some of the leading international thinkers of the era were so appalled by the Biafran tragedy that they took it upon themselves to pay the breakaway republic a visit and get a firsthand look at the suffering, the destitution, and the starvation. Auberon Waugh came and afterward wrote a devastating book on Harold Wilsons duplicitous policy. He also named his newborn child Biafra Waugh! There was a small group of American writersKurt Vonnegut,1 Herbert Gold, and Harvey Swadoswho came to show solidarity with me and other beleaguered Biafran writers.2 Vonnegut was so devastated following his trip that he cried for weeks. Todd Davis reports that Vonneguts response to his trip to Biafra was not suicide, but tears. He recounts his return to Manhattan, where he checked in to [sic] the Royalton Hotel (his family was skiing in Vermont): I found myself crying so hard I was barking like a dog. I didnt come close to doing that after World War II [Fates 174]. [His experiences in] Biafra and Mozambique, quite obviously, play a part in the authors consistent plea that we respect one another, an action that must involve our participation in meeting the needs of the global community.3 Kurt left in the seminal essay Biafra: A People Betrayed a glowing testament to his observations. Geoffrey Hill, the British poet, Douglas Killam, the Canadian literary critic and scholar, Stanley Diamond, and the amiable Conor Cruise OBrien all visited Biafra. Diamond brought something additionala long-standing scholarly interest and expertise in the territory.4 This world-renowned anthropologist became an intellectual Biafran warrior,5 galvanizing a formidable American and Canadian intellectual response to the tragedy. Diamonds knowledge of Nigeria came from having done extensive fieldwork in parts of the country right from the last days of the British raj, and he followed its affairs closely through independence, and after. He understood the ideological dimension of the Nigeria-Biafra conflict. He was not fooled by the strenuous effort of Britain to pass off her former colony as a success story of African independence, when in fact it had only passed, with Britains active collaboration, from colonial to neocolonial status. He saw the bloody civil war not as Harold Wilson and other apologists for Nigeria presented itthat is, as progressive nationalism fighting primitive tribalismbut as the ruining of a rare and genuine national culture at the moment of its birth. It was advantageous to the federal Nigerian case to stigmatize Biafra for its alleged links with South Africa and Portugal. Diamond pointed out that it was the Czechoslovakians and the Chinese, not South Africans or Portuguese, who supplied the bulk of Biafras arms in the first year of the war, and that the Czech source dried up after the Prague spring reform movement was crushed by Soviet tanks and the fall of Alexander in 1968. The moment has come for Nigerians and the world to ask the proper questions and draw the right inferences about what happened in those terrible years. Stanley Diamonds perceptions will, no doubt, be a great help to us. They are rooted in prodigious learning and a profoundly humane sensibility. I am happy that this remarkable man, who has searched far, who has found and reclaimed the uncluttered vision of the primitive at the crossroads of science and song, has bestowed on my country the benefit of his deep scholarly, humanistic, and spiritual meditation. The New York Review of Books of May 22, 1969, carried a long article, Biafra Revisited, by Conor Cruise OBrien on the second visit he made with Diamond to the secessionist enclave. It was accompanied by a poem I had just written in memory of Christopher Okigbo, Africas greatest modern poet, who had recently died on the Biafran battlefield. It also carried a profoundly moving poem, Sunday in Biafra, by Stanley Diamond that, like all his poetry, combines startling substantiality with haunting ease and inevitability, and it stamps on the mind like an icon of Africas tragedy an image and logic that nothing will remove.6 Nigerian author Enzwa-Ohaeto later wrote, OBrien was convinced that the survival of Biafra would be a victory for African courage, endurance, and skill, and an opportunity for the further development of African creativity. In his report on that visit in The New York Review of Books, he points out that of the two best known writers, . . . Achebe is a convinced Biafran patriot and the other, the playwright Wole Soyinka (a Yoruba) is a prisoner in Northern Nigeria.7 Of critical importance to the entire debate around the Biafran affair was OBriens conclusion: [N]o one seriously interested in African literature, in its relation to African social and political life, can have failed to ponder the meaning of the choices and fates of these two men.8 The War and the Nigerian Intellectual The war came as a surprise to the vast majority of artists and intellectuals on both sides of the conflict. We had not realized just how fragile, even weak, Nigeria was as a nation. Only a few Nigerians, such as the poet Christopher Okigbo, had early and privileged insights into the Nigerian-Biafran crisis. We, the intellectuals, were deeply disillusioned by the ineptitude of Nigerias ruling elite and by what we saw taking place in our young nation. As far as their relationship with the masses was concerned, Nigerian politicians, we felt, had slowly transformed themselves into the personification of Anwu.the waspa notorious predator from the insect kingdom. Wasps, African children learn during story time, greet unsuspecting prey with a painful, paralyzing sting, then lay eggs on their body, which then proceed to eat the victim alive. Intellectuals had other reasons to despair: We were especially disheartened by the disintegration of the state because we were brought up in the belief that we were destined to rule. Our Northern Nigerian brethren had similar sentiments, but those feelings came from a totally different understanding of the world. This opinion may explain why so many intellectuals played an active role in various capacities during the war years. Some of us evolved into public intellectuals through the period of the national crisis leading up to the war and exposed distortions and misrepresentations within the political system. Once the war began, however, many, particularly those of us in Biafra, drew upon the teachings of our ancient traditions. Nri philosophy implores intellectuals to transform themselves into warriors of peace during periods of crisis, with a proclivity for action over rhetoric. Many of our finest writers and thinkers were armed with this ancient wisdom and worked toward a peaceful resolution to the hostilities. Cyprian Ekwensi was one of the pioneers of the West African literary renaissance of the twentieth century. He was the author of numerous works, such as An African Nights Entertainment, The Passport of Mallam Ilia, Burning Grass, The Drummer Boy, and Jagua Nana. When the war broke out Ekwensi left his job as director of the Nigerian Ministry of Information and served the Biafran cause in the Bureau of External Publicity, and as a roving ambassador for the people of the enclave. During the war years I traveled with Ekwensi and Gabriel Okara on several diplomatic voyages on behalf of the people of Biafra. Wole Soyinka was already regarded by this time as Africas foremost dramatist. He had published The Swamp Dweller, The Lion and the Jewel, and The Trials of Brother Jero as well as collections of poetry. The Road is considered by many to be his greatest play. A Dance of the Forest, a biting criticism of Nigerias ruling classes, was the first of what was to become his signature roleas one of the most consistent critics of misrule from his generation. His 1964 novel, The Interpreters, as well as ventures into recording, film, and poetry, showcased his versatility. Soyinkas attempts to avert a fullblown civil war by meeting with Colonel Ojukwu and Victor Banjo, as well as with then lieutenant colonel Olusegun Obasanjo, would earn him enemies in the Nigerian federal government and a twenty-two-month imprisonment. The story I was told about this incident was that Wole, fed up with the federal governments unsuccessful treatment of the Biafra issue, had traveled to secessionist Biafra in an attempt to appeal for a cease-fire to the hostilities. He planned to set up an antiwar delegation made up of intellectuals, artists, and writers from both sides of the conflictand from around the worldto achieve his aim. When he returned to Nigeria the authorities arrested him and accused him of assisting Biafra in the purchase of weapons of war.1 There was no evidence to corroborate their case, and Wole was imprisoned without bail. Later, to justify holding him without evidence, the federal government accused Wole of being a Biafran agent or spy, trumped-up charges that he categorically denied. I remember relating my disgust about Soyinkas predicament to the editors of Transition in 1968 during the war: I have no intention of being placed in a Nigerian situation at all. I find it intolerable. I find the Nigerian situation untenable. If I had been a Nigerian, I think I would have been in the same situation as Wole Soyinka isin prison.2 There was great concern for Woles health and safety as time went on. For many of the months he was in prison he was held in solitary confinement and moved from one prison to another. Most of us in Biafra were appalled. PEN International and many major writers of the timeNorman Mailer comes to mindled a vigorous protest on his behalf, but he was not released until close to the very end of the war. Professor Kenneth Onwuka Dike inspired us all very greatly and deserves special attention. He was a pioneer in so many respects. He was one of the first pupils to attended Dennis Memorial Grammar School. After that he traveled to the Gold Coast to attend Achimota College, and then went farther afield to Sierra Leone to attend Fourah Bay College before proceeding to England for undergraduate studies. He received his bachelor of science degree at the Durham University, England, and his master of arts degree from the University of Aberdeen, in Scotland. After a few years of study at Oxford, he earned his PhD in history from the University of London and returned to Nigeria, first to join the faculty, but later to become the first indigenous vice chancellor of University College, Ibadan. In the late 1960s, the Ford and Rockefeller foundations decided to set up the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture somewhere in Nigeria, under the leadership of the former president of North Dakota State University, Fargo, Dr. Herbert R. Albrecht; Dike, along with Dr. T. A. Lambo, were among the Nigerians consulted. Dike suggested the prestigious institute be founded on a twenty-three-hundred-acre campus, in a loose affiliation with University College, Ibadan. And so it was. Dike was involved in several of these kinds of projects. For example, he was also instrumental in the establishment of the Nigerian National Archives. Everyone who knew him will acknowledge that Dike was one of the most detribalized Nigerians of his generation. This point requires emphasis. A man of this ilk, a rare breed indeed, watched horrified at the disintegration of the nation that he and so many others had fought to establish. His sentiments would change to despair and anger following the massacre of thirty thousand Easterners and the rising hostility toward him and his family in Ibadan.3 Dike resigned as vice chancellor of Ibadan in December 1966 and returned to Eastern Nigeria, where he served as vice chancellor of the University of Biafra for a brief period. When the war broke out Dike was appointed by Ojukwu to be a roving ambassador for Biafra. He and other roving ambassadors4 traveled extensively throughout the world, speaking on behalf of the secessionist republic. Dike was particularly effective in this role, and his appearances attracted vigorous media attention. I remember reading several articles in the Washington Post following his appearance at the National Press Club. One article in particular, called Biafra Explains Its Case and published on April 13, 1969, was especially influential. Before our time, Dike had already established an international reputation for academic excellence as a historian. He taught at Harvard University after the war as the first Mellon Professor of African History. In 1978, at the dawn of Nigerias Second Republic, this towering international academic returned to Nigeria to help set up the Anambra State University of Technology (ASUTECH). It is a disservice to this wonderful man, to his achievements and contribution to Nigerias development, that he died in 1983 from a blood infection that would not have been difficult to cure had he stayed in the United States!5 Vincent Chukwuemeka Ike also supported the Biafran cause and served the Biafran people in several bureaucratic positions. Later, through prolific literary output, Ike took a well-deserved place at the vanguard of the continents leading novelists. The literary harvest from Africa today owes a great debt to female African intellectual forerunners. These griots, orators, and later writers played an indispensable role in recording, molding, and transmitting the African story. By boldly mixing numerous African and Western literary traditions in a cauldron, seasoning them with local color, and spicing their tales with the complexity of the human condition, modern women wordsmiths have deepened our understanding of our world. Florence Nwanzuruahu Nwapa (Flora Nwapa) belongs to this important school of African female literary progenitors. Five years before the war, in 1962, Flora Nwapa informed me that she was working on a manuscript to be called Efuru. After some editorial work, Efuru was published in 1966, on the eve of the war, to great fanfare. It was a monumental event, as it was, as far as I could tell, the first novel published by a Nigerian woman. It was also important because it was a book ahead of its time, with an assuredly feminist plot and perspective.6 Around the same period, as providence would have it, Alan Hill, the publishing executive at Heinemann Publishers in England, asked me to become the first editor of the African Writers Series. Alan and I, with James Currey and a few others, developed a vision of gathering much of Africas literary talent under this series rubric in order to showcase the best of postcolonial African literature. We had a fascinating beginning, and ended up publishing Christopher Okigbo from Nigeria, Ayi Kwei Armah from Ghana, al-Tayyib Salih from Sudan, from Kenya, Bessie Head from Botswana, Nadine Gordimer from South Africa, and Nelson Mandela, along with several other major African writers.7 Flora Nwapa aided the Biafran war effort in various capacities, and after the conflict was over continued her service to her people in the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, the Ministry of Lands, Survey and Urban Development, and the Ministry of Establishment. She is remembered for her bold efforts at reconstructing many institutions that had been destroyed during the NigeriaBiafra War.8 It is important to point out that a number of writers were neutral and quietly, as far as I could tell, apolitical during the conflict between Nigeria and Biafra. They did not align themselves with or provide overt support to either belligerent during the war. One such individual was Amos Tutuola, who was a talented writer. His most famous novels, The Palm-Wine Drinkard, published in 1946, and My Life in the Bush of Ghosts, in 1954, explore Yoruba traditions and folklore. He received a great deal of criticism from Nigerian literary critics for his use of broken or Pidgin English. Luckily for all of us, Dylan Thomas, the Welsh poet and writer, was enthralled by Tutuolas bewitching literary prose and wrote glowing reviews that helped Tutuolas work attain international acclaim. I still believe that Tutuolas critics in Nigeria missed the point. The beauty of his tales was fantastical expression of a form of an indigenous Yoruba, therefore African, magical realism. It is important to note that his books came out several decades before the brilliant Gabriel Garca Mrquez published his own masterpieces of Latin American literature, such as One Hundred Years of Solitude. I first met Mabel Segun (nee Aig-Imoukhuede), another prominent literary figure, who was in the second set of students admitted to University College, Ibadan, around 1949. She was a bright and energetic student from Sabongida Ora in Edo State. I was the editor of the university paper, the University Herald, and when it came time to appoint a deputy editor and advertisement manager, she was a natural choice. In 1965, African University Press, a formidable outfit at the time, published her childrens book, My Fathers Daughter. Bolanle Awe, Dr. Tai Solarin, S. J. Cookey, Gabriel Okara, Ola Rotimi, Ade Ajayi, and Emmanuel Obiechina were other towering figures of that era who I admired. The Life and Work of Christopher Okigbo I have written and been quoted elsewhere as saying that Christopher Ifekandu Okigbo was the finest Nigerian poet of his generation, but I believe that as his work becomes better and more widely known in the world, he will also be recognized as one of the most remarkable anywhere in our time. For while other poets wrote good poems, Okigbo conjured up for us an amazing, haunting, poetic firmament of a wild and violent beauty.1 Forty years later I still stand by that assessment. Christopher and I kept in touch after we graduated from Government College, Umuahia, and our friendship grew during our time at University College, Ibadan. He studied the classics and took classes in Latina subject that was not available at Government College, Umuahia. A rumor I heard at the time was that a teacher at Yaba Higher College who had been Pius Okigbos teacher (Christophers senior brother), Professor E. A. Cadle, had wanted Pius to study classics, but Pius did not want to, and instead traveled to America to study economics at Northwestern University. Pius later became arguably the continents leading thinker in that field. By the time Christopher got to University College, Ibadan, Professor Cadle was now a professor of the classics and later dean of the Faculty of Arts. He persuaded Christopher to take a major in the classics. Christopher did, although he had a myriad of other interests. He was involved in all aspects of campus life and had a very active social calendar. He was a member of every cultural, literary, intellectual and political organization, club, and association. He and I were founding members of the notable Mbari Club, which was led by Ulli Beier, our professor. Okigbo was also the editor in chief of the University Weekly, the campus newspaper. His legendary creative work was first noted at Umuahia, where the teachers encouraged this budding talent. Later, at the University College, Ibadan, he published a number of poems in Horn, the university magazine edited by J. P. Clark. He also published his work in Wole Soyinkas Black Orpheus and Transition, and then produced a number of critically acclaimed poetry collections, including the groundbreaking classics Heavens Gate and Labyrinths.2 After graduation, his reputation as a talented intellectual spread like a savannah bush fire. He was highly sought after. He rapidly ran up a list of jobs that read like a manual of careers: civil servant, businessman, teacher, librarian, publisher, industrialist, and soldier. I am told that Chike Momah, a professional librarian, was somewhat scandalized when Okigbo announced that he was going to Nsukka to be interviewed for a position in the library of the new university. Reminded that he knew nothing about librarianship, Okigbo blithely replied that he had bought a book on the subject, which he intended to read during the fourhundred-mile journey to the interview. And he got the job!3 Christopher could not enter or leave a room unremarked, yet he was not extravagant in manner or appearance. There was something about him not easy to define, a certain inevitability of drama and event. There was a day, back when my family still lived in Lagos, when my wife, Christie, overheard some people talking quite early in the morning on our patio. Startled and a bit frightened, she wondered what was going on. A few minutes later she smelled the aroma of food, and at this point her curiousity was piqued. What was the cook doing so early in the morning? she thought out loud. She put on her robe and went to find out. It turned out that it was Christopher Okigbo. There he was sitting on the kitchen table with the food that the cook had prepared for him, munching away. He had arrived very early in the morning, went to the boys quarters, and woke up the cook, described what he wanted him to cook, and said, Dont tell them anything. That was quintessential Okigbo. Christophers vibrancy and heightened sense of life touched everyone he came into contact with. It is not surprising, therefore, that the young poet Kevin Echeruo should have celebrated him as an Ogbanjeone of those mysterious, elusive, and highly talented beings who hurry to leave the world and to come again. Equally profound was the fact that Pol Ndu, who died in a road disaster he had predicted every gory detail of in a poem five years earlier, proclaimed Christopher a seer.4 Christopher never took antimalarial drugs, because he rather enjoyed the cozy, delirious fever he had when malaria got him down, about once a year. He relished challenges, and the more unusual or difficult, the better it made him feel. Although he turned his hand to many things, he never did anything badly or half-heartedly.5  The experiences of the Igbo community from the pogroms onward had different effects on different people. There were a multitude of reactionsanger, loathing, sorrow, concern, depression, etc. These sentiments in Christophers case somehow transformed into a very strong pro-Biafra feeling. He had no doubt at all in his mind about Biafra and the need for the country to be a free and separate nation. That strong stance was something new for Christopher. The intensity of Christophers dedication to the Biafran cause was so deep that I remember hearing him get into a raucous debate with his elder brother Pius.6 Apparently the cause of the flare-up of emotions was a discussion about Biafran sovereignty and its importance for the Easterners, particularly the Igbo, to create a state of their own and secede from the federal republic of Nigeria. Pius Okigbo was not, at least initially, very strong in his support of the idea of separation. This position outraged the much younger Christopher, who rebuked Pius by saying: Dont let what happened to Ironsi repeat itself, implying that Pius, in his determination to preserve One Nigeria, should be careful not to be destroyed by Nigeria like Ironsi was during the time he was trying to appease extremists. Pius was so shocked by the rebuke that he turned to me, raised his hands in disbelief, and said, Uncle Chris!7 in a sarcastic tone. Pius Okigbo was a very senior economist and part of the diplomatic corps representing Nigeria in several capacities, so he was a bit wary about what was going on in the East, and in Nigeria as a whole, and rightfully so. Later, as the atrocities against the Igbos in particular intensified, Pius Okigbos position solidified squarely on Biafras side. At that point the pressure of war was being felt. Now unbeknownst to us, Christopher had joined the army. Whereas I did not find the army particularly exciting or interesting, for whatever reason Okigbo was enthralled by the military. He would keep you up at night telling stories of what Nzeogwu and the other officers said.8 When Okigbo decided to join the army he went to great lengths to conceal his intention from me, for fear, no doubt, that I might attempt to dissuade him. I probably would have tried. He made up an elaborate story about an imminent and secret mission he was asked to undertake to Europe that put me totally off the scent. But to make absolutely certain, he borrowed my traveling bag and left his brown briefcase with me. When I saw him again two weeks later he was a major, by special commission, in the Biafran army, though I never saw him in uniform.9 The Major Nigerian Actors in the Conflict: Ojukwu and Gowon A number of individuals played key roles during the Nigeria-Biafra War.1 The principal actors in 1967, however, were both young Sandhurst-trained soldiers Odumegwu Ojukwu, who was thirty-three, and Yakubu Gowon, who was thirtytwo. One was from a highly privileged background and the other was the socalled darling of the British establishment.2 THE ARISTOCRAT General Chukwuemeka (Emeka) Odumegwu Ojukwu was born on November 4, 1933, in Zungeru, in Northern Nigeria, to Sir Louis Odumegwu Ojukwu and Grace Oyibonanu. The senior Ojukwu was already a legendary figure while I was growing up in Eastern Nigeria, known far and wide for his great wealth and success in business. Indeed, by midcentury Sir Louis Odumegwu Ojukwu had established himself as one of West Africas leading entrepreneurs, with business interests spanning several sectors of the Nigerian and West African economies agriculture, mining, transportation, and banking. Sir Louis Ojukwu at some time or other sat on the boards of a number of the largest corporations of the timeShell BP, United Africa Company (UAC), Nigerian Coal Corporation, and African Continental Bank. For his services to the empire, Louis Odumegwu Ojukwu was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II during her official visit to Enugu in 1956. It was in this privileged environment that General Emeka Ojukwu was raised. Like a number of other children of privilege, Ojukwu was educated at one of the leading secondary schools in the nation, Kings College, Lagos. Later he was sent to Epsom College, England, and then on to Lincoln College University of Oxford.3 When Emeka Ojukwu returned to Nigeria after his studies in England, he spent a short time finding himself. Against the wishes of his father, who wanted him to attend law school and join the family business in some capacity, the young Ojukwu decided to first work in the Eastern Nigeria civil service as an assistant district officer (ADO). Then, in a move likely designed to enrage his father even further, the young Ojukwu joined the colonial armed forces known as the Queens Own Nigeria Regiment. Emeka Ojukwus decision caused quite a sensation at the time, because most educated Nigerians, particularly those of privileged birth like him, sought jobs in the business, academic, or civil service sectors, but not in the army. The Nigerian army did have educated officers, but they were few in number. Emeka Ojukwu went back to England to attend the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst and returned shortly after to Nigeria, where he joined the officer corps and rapidly rose through the military ranks. He was accorded a great deal of respect by his military colleagues, who admired his pedigree and education.4 Frederick Forsyth, Ojukwus close friend, who would become a close Biafran ally during the war, reports of his days in England: [H]e developed a private philosophy of total self-reliance, an unyielding internal sufficiency that requires no external support from others.5 This trait would bring Ojukwu in direct collision with some senior Biafrans, such as Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, Michael Okpara, Dr. Okechukwu Ikejiani, and a few others who were concerned about Ojukwus tendency toward introversion and independent decision making. Emeka Ojukwu received a mixed reception among the expatriate, mainly British, population in Nigeria. Many admired him for his background, as well as for his oratorical skills, and took great pride in the fact that he had been educated extensively in England. There is a magnificent story of how Emeka Ojukwus professors at Oxford enjoyed taking a spin or two in his sports car while he was a student there. Others, in contrast, felt that Ojukwu was some sort of spoiled rich kid. This impression made it more difficult for him to be cast as a sympathetic figure in the Western media when the war broke out. Complicating this image problem was the fact that some important wartime actors and observers, such as Sir David Hunt, the British ambassador to Nigeria during the conflict, and the eminent British journalist John de St. Jorre, believed Ojukwu looked down on Gowon. Ojukwu felt, they believed, that as an Oxford man he was far better prepared for leadership.6 Those of us who knew Ojukwu did not feel he harbored such sentiments. Whatever the case may be, Ojukwus background and temperament, for good or ill, influenced the decisions and choices that he made throughout the crisis and during much of what many believed was a personal war and collision of egos7 with Gowon. THE GENTLEMAN GENERAL Yakubu Gowon was born on October 19, 1934, in Pankshin, Plateau State, under circumstances very different from those of his military nemesis Emeka Ojukwu. Yakubu Gowons parents were Christian missionaries. His family spent several years during his early development in Zaria in Hausa land, where he received his early education and learned to speak the language of the dominant Hausa/Fulani fluently.8 Yakubu Gowon then received military training in Ghana and Eaton Hall in England before proceeding to the legendary officer training school in Sandhurst. He then attended Young Officers College, Hythe Warminster, in 1957, Staff College, Camberley, England (1962), and Joint Services College, Latimer, England (1965).9 He returned to Nigeria soon thereafter and became a star officer; his ability to assimilate would serve him well as he advanced rapidly in the Nigerian army. Alexander Madiebo recounts the perception of Gowons contemporaries in the army: Gowon for unknown reasons has always been very popular with the British authorities, both during his training in Britain and throughout his military service in Nigeria. For this reason, his progress in the army was so remarkable and extraordinary that even his fellow Northern officers were beginning to grumble. For instance, when he was chosen to attend the Camberley Staff College, England in January 1962, Major Pam, a Jos [Joint Service] Officer senior to him, called him a sneaky sucker.10 Yakubu Gowon was a particular favorite of the queen and other members of Britains royal family, a fact that he relished immensely.11 [He] impressed the British monarchy as a sincere God-fearing leader who was determined to work for the development of his country under conditions of international peace and stability. He did not fail to impress Britains cousins across the Atlantic either, at any opportunity. Henry Luce, the wealthy and highly influential American publisher of Time magazine, found Gowon [a] spit-and-polish product of Britains Royal Military Academy at Sandhurst. Gowon is sometimes dismissed as Jack the Boy Scout in Lagos diplomatic circles. He neither smokes nor drinks, and keeps his 5-ft. 10-in. frame trim at 140 lbs.12 Whether or not one can ascribe this resentment held by his fellow officers toward Gowon to soldiers envy isnt clear, but what was evident was that Gowon was a charismatic, eloquent, personable soldier who utilized a number of his skills to impress the rich and powerful. General Aguiyi-Ironsi, who became Nigerias first military head of state following the failed coup dtat of January 15, 1966, was one of many who were fond of Gowon, and the general appointed him chief of army staff. While I was watching events unfold in Nigeria in 1966, I found it instructive that when Ironsi was killed in the countercoup dtat of young Northern officers on July 29, 1966, it was Yakubu Gowon who was chosen to become head of the federal military government and commander in chief of the armed forces. Gowons elevation to head of state was a tactical compromise to assuage most ethnic groups that Nigeria was not coming under an Islamic Hausa/Fulani leadership intent on Christian and Southern domination. It did not help matters that many officers did not feel that Gowon was the most qualified to be in the role of head of state. In the Nigerian Outlook of March 21, 1967, Ojukwu revealed the sentiments of many military officers in Eastern Nigeria: The point here and the crux of the whole matter is the fact that the North wants to dominate. . . . Gowon is not capable of doing anything. He is only a front man for the whole NPC/NNDP coalition. . . . [I]n fact the officers and men who took part in the July massacre were being used as tools. . . . But the NNDP/NPC coalition which master-minded this pogrom definitely wanted to continue the old policy of the North, that is to dominate and dictate.13 Behind the scenes, Murtala Muhammed was nursing his wounds. It was well-known that Muhammed, a favorite son of the Muslim Hausa/Fulani military establishment, was initially tapped to be head of statean idea that was quickly shelved in favor of Gowon, the charismatic Christian and ethnic minority candidate from Plateau State. This snub was not lost on Muhammed, who harbored an unrelenting resentment toward Gowon and would later, in 1975, mount the decisive coup that ousted him from office. In what was widely seen as an attempt to soothe growing ethnic hostility, particularly in Eastern Nigeria, Gowon appointed Emeka Ojukwu, a fellow Sandhurst alumnus, to the post of military governor of the Eastern Region, a post similar to that which he had held within Aguiyi-Ironsis Supreme Military Council. It was said that Emeka Ojukwu served in this new capacity reluctantly, because of what he believed was Gowons unclear role in the coup that led to the assassination of General Aguiyi-Ironsi and nearly two hundred Igbo officers. The relationship between the two men, shaky from the start of Gowons new government, suffered several other setbacks in the months to come, particularly following the series of pogroms that left over thirty thousand Easterners, mainly Igbo, murdered, and nearly one million fleeing to their ancestral homes in 1966.14  There are a number who believe that neither Gowon nor Ojukwu were the right leaders for that desperate time, because they were blinded by ego, hindered by a lack of administrative experience, and obsessed with interpersonal competition and petty rivalries.15 As a consequence, according to this school of thought, these two men failed to make appropriate and wise decisions throughout the conflict and missed several opportunities when compromise could have saved the day.16 No small number of international political science experts found the NigeriaBiafra War baffling, because it deviated frustratingly from their much vaunted models. But traditional Igbo philosophers, eyes ringed with white chalk and tongues dipped in the proverbial brew of prophecy, lay the scale and complexity of our situation at the feet of ethnic hatred and ekwolomanifold rivalries between the belligerents. Internal rivalries, one discovers, between personalities, across ethnic groups, and within states, often fuel the persistence of conflicts.17 Conflicts are not just more likely to last longer as a result of these rivalries but are also more likely to recur, with alternating periods of aggression and peace of shorter and shorter duration.18 A lock-in periodthe intensification of war with ever-shortening times of peaceis also classically seen.19 The internal rivalries that existed between Gowon and Ojukwu, and the pathological intraethnic dynamics that plagued the Nigerian military and wartime government, contributed in no small measure to the scale of the catastrophe that was the Nigeria-Biafra War. The fractured respect and unenthusiastic reception Gowon received following his ascendancy to the position of head of state was only the beginning. There was a stifling anger at the dissolution of the Nigerian state, with all its ramifications. These sentiments were borne particularly by the Easterners overlooked by the young general at the helm of Nigerian affairs, with disastrous consequences. There are a few other factors that merit consideration. There was an obsessive tendency by both belligerentsGowon and Ojukwuto seek positions of strength and avoid looking weak throughout the conflict. I am not referring to the propaganda statements, however over the top, which one expects in times of war, but to the ego-driven policies that were clearly not about the conflict at hand. Some of Ojukwus and Gowons civilian advisers aggravated the crisis by transforming themselves into sycophants. Rather than encourage their respective leader on each side of the conflict to consider a cease-fire, they massaged their egos and spurred them on to ever-escalating hostility.20 The longer the war dragged on, the more difficult it was for both sides to give in to anything that might lead to a peaceful resolution. In Biafra there was a widely held belief that a cease-fire would lead to genocide or retribution of equal magnitude, or at least the relinquishing of self-determination and freedom. Biafrans widely believed that the gap between our ideological position and that of our Nigerian brethren had simply grown too wide to bridge.21 Complicating matters was the fact that most intellectuals in Biafra viewed Nigeria, now under military dictatorship, as a neocolonial state under the iron grasp of its former colonial master, Great Britain, with a very willing steward at the helm. There are some scholars who believe that the Igbo turned to Emeka Ojukwu by virtue of the fact that he was the governor of the Eastern Region of Nigeria at the time of the crisisthe man in power theory. Others have gone as far as to suggest that the war would have been prevented if there was a leader other than Ojukwu in place. The first statement will be debated for generations. As for the second, I believe that following the pogroms, or rather, the ethnic cleansing in the North that occurred over the four months starting in May 1966, which was compounded by the involvement, even connivance, of the federal government in those evil and dastardly acts, secession from Nigeria and the war that followed became an inevitability. To be sure, there were a number that harbored alternative points of view. One of those people was the distinguished diplomat Raph Uwechue, who served as Biafras envoy to Paris up until 1968, and then later as Nigerias ambassador to Mali. Uwechue published a well-known personal memoir called Reflections on the Nigerian Civil War: Facing the Future in 1969, in which he unleashed a scathing criticism of Ojukwu and the leadership he provided for Biafra: In Biafra two wars were fought simultaneously. The first was for the survival of the Ibos [sic] as a race. The second was for the survival of Ojukwus leadership. Ojukwus error, which proved fatal for millions of Ibos [sic], was that he put the latter first.22 Many who share Uwechues point of view cite as an example Ojukwus refusal to accept $600,000 from the British for relief supplies; they see this as evidence of a beleaguered albeit committed adversary who made ideological rather than practical or pragmatic decisions. Uwechues conclusions about the Biafran people are, however, far more controversial, in my opinion: The Biafran masses, enslaved by an extremely efficient propaganda network and cowed by the iron grip of a ruthless military machine, had neither the facts nor the liberty to form an independent opinion. The case of the elite was different. . . . Those who had access to the facts knew that the time had come to seek a realistic way to end the war. . . . In private they expressed this view but proved too cowardly to take a stand and tell Ojukwu the truth.23 The late Senator Francis Ellah, a close friend of mine who helped set up the Biafran mission in London, and then served Biafra in several capacities, provides much more of a middle-ground analysis. He does, however, come down on the side of the many who believed that the Biafrans, not just the Nigerians, missed a number of opportunities to compromise and end the war earlier than they did: I think the circumstances that led to Biafra were very unique; I remember that when I heard news of the secession on the radio I almost broke down . . . the causes were quite traumatic. I think once secession had been declared, the efforts made to fight the war were staggering. We were highly impressed by the solidarity shown by the Eastern Region. Then we had a cause we were fighting for. I think that around March 1968, when we were in a position to achieve a confederation, we should have accepted the chance or opportunity. When we were insisting that Biafran sovereignty was not negotiable, as the government thought at the time, we ought to have considered the tragedy of the situation, because this country would have been much better if we had a confederation of four to six states, other than what we have now. Around the time of the Kampala talks there were definite signs that a confederation could be achieved. The Biafran side was adamant on the fact of sovereignty being nonnegotiable.24 THE FIRST SHOT That lone rifle-shot anonymous in the dark striding chest-high through a nervous suburb at the break of our season of thunders will yet steep its flight and lodge more firmly than the greater noises ahead in the forehead of memory.1 The Biafran Invasion of the Mid-West The Nigeria-Biafra War began soon after Emeka Ojukwus proclamation of secession. Gowon decided to first use the federal armys First Command in what he termed a police action,1 in an attempt to restore federal government authority in Lagos and the break-away Eastern region. The move to capture the Biafran border towns of Ogoja and Nsukka proved to be a declaration of war. Following this, in July 1967, Nigerian troops attempted to cross the Niger Bridge into Biafra. The Biafran army was able to halt its advance and disperse them.2 That Biafran response became an advance, leading to the taking of a large swath of the Mid-Western Region in a surprise maneuver that the Nigerian federal troops had not anticipated. Ojukwu explained his ambitious plan this way: Our motive was not territorial ambition or the desire of conquest. We went into the Midwest (later declared the Republic of Benin) purely in an effort to seize the serpent by the head; every other activity in that Republic was subordinated to that single aim. We were going to Lagos to seize the villain Gowon, and we took necessary military precautions.3 Despite the euphoric verbal heroics espoused by Ojukwu, John de St. Jorre, the well-regarded reporter for The Observer, provided a far more subdued picture of Biafran army readiness and organization: The Biafrans stormed through the Mid-West not in the usual massive impedimenta of modern warfare but in a bizarre collection of private cars, mammy wagons, cattle and vegetable trucks. The command vehicle was a Peugeot 404 estate car. The whole operation was not carried out by an army or even a brigade . . . but by at most 1,000 men, the majority poorly trained and armed, and many wearing civilian clothes because they had not been issued with uniforms.4 In the days preceding the Biafran invasion I was informed by friends and relatives who lived in the Mid-West Region5 that the air there was rife with rumors of an impending federal takeover to provide it with strategic and logistical access to Eastern Nigeria if war broke out. The leading political and traditional leaders of the Mid-West had made it clear to Gowon that they wanted no part of a civil war and that the region would be neutral in the event of any hostilities. There were several reasons for this position. Apart from a desire for peace during a precarious period, the leaders of that part of Nigeria recognized that their citizens were of a multiethnic background, including a sizable Igbo population. The Biafrans utilized this knowledge in mapping out their strategy. The leaders of the offensive related their reasons for occupying the Mid-West as one organized to prevent the Federal Government from forcing Mid Westerners to enlist to fight against their own people, thus undermining the mediatory role which the Mid-West had been playing. Indeed, some scholars speculate that Governor David Ejoor, the military governor of the Mid-West, was informed of Ojukwus intention to invade and that both men could have very well met to discuss the implications of such an action.6 Brigadier Victor Banjo was one of the masterminds7 of this successful Biafran offensive. Ojukwu had released Banjo, a Nigerian soldier who had allegedly taken part in the January 15 coup dtat and was detained in Ikot Ekpene Prison. Banjo had been found guilty of treason by the Nigerian federal government despite his insistence of innocence. He decided to stay on Biafran soil after secession rather than return and face court-martial. Ojukwu got tactical, strategic, and political mileage from having Banjo in Biafra, and he enjoyed the prospect of having a Nigerian soldier fight for him. Against protests in certain Biafran military quarters, Ojukwu brought Victor Banjo into the statehouse at Enugu as one of his close military confidants and advisers. Victor Banjo, it was widely known, was not in favor of Ojukwus secessionist aspirations but favored a solution to Nigerias problems that would result in the deamalgamation of the country back into Southern and Northern Nigeria.8 In the late evening of August 14, 1967, soon after the Biafrans invaded the Mid-Western Region, Brigadier Banjo spoke to Mid-Westerners and Nigerians over the airwaves from Benin. Hundreds of thousands of listeners across the nation tuned in, expecting a detailed explanation for the invasion and a description of the long-term plans of the Biafran army. Some of the questions running through my mind and the minds of many Nigerians across the nation included the following: Who exactly was behind this invasion? Was this a temporary occupation? What was the long-term plan? What would be the reaction of Gowon and the Nigerian federal forces? Banjos address was a disappointment. It sounded to me far more like a lament of the breakup of Nigeria than a speech coming from a Biafran military leader or an explanation for the invasion of Nigerian territory or Biafran secession. Banjo dedicated the first half of his message to what sounded like an overview of Nigerias political and military history and his own travails within that establishment. In the second half of the speech he finally got around to explaining to his listeners that the Biafran invasion was not a conquest . . . or an invasion but an exercise designed to enable the people of the Mid-West to see the Nigerian problem in its proper perspective. Banjo appealed to all civil servants to return to work the very next day and assured them of their safety. In a veiled threat, he warned those who failed to comply that they would lose their jobs.9 Closely following Banjos speech was the promulgation by the Biafrans of a new decree that established what would be known as the Republic of Benin (the area occupied by Biafran forces in the Mid-Western Region) and the appointment of Major Albert Nwazu Okonkwo as its military administrator. Okonkwos administration, we were told, would supersede the previous government of the military governor, David Ejoor, who had been appointed by the Nigerian head of state. Major Okonkwo found his brief, some might say draconian, rulehe imposed martial law, curfews, and limited accessibilitypunctuated by insurrections and burdened by the assaults of organized underground resistance groups. Many Mid-Westerners passed along to me accounts of their conflicting feelings after the Biafran offensive: We, on the one hand, were being told by the Biafran propaganda machinery that we were being liberated from tyranny, but on the other [we were] feeling like an occupied military zone under martial law.10 There was also growing discontent among the Biafran soldiers who were only there on military assignment but increasingly found themselves targets of local hostility. There were reports of Biafran troops seeking medical treatment for food poisoning suffered at the hands of cooks who had been recruited from the surrounding occupied areas. The Biafran soldiers were under siege from several fronts.11 According to civil war lore, Ojukwu was livid upon learning about the contents of Banjos speech to Mid-Westerners following Biafras takeover because it did not sufficiently demonstrate solidarity with his own secessionist aspirations to leave Nigeria.12 Ojukwu apparently also had been told that Banjo was complicit in a plot that enabled David Ejoorthe erstwhile military governor of the Mid-Western Regionto escape from the clutches of the Biafran forces. This made it possible, the allegations continued, for Ejoor to meet with the federal government in Lagos and provide the Nigerian head of state with critical military and tactical information about the Biafran offensive. It was also alleged that Banjo failed on purpose to continue the surprise offensive as planned beyond Ore in the Mid-West to Nigerias administrative capital, Lagos, and largest commercial city, Ibadan, after direct contact with agents of the federal government and Yoruba leaders.13 Banjos detractors, who never trusted him in the first place, had by this time successfully labeled him a traitor and an enemy of the state of Biafra. In 1982, Ojukwu provided a glimpse of his disappointment about the role that Banjo played in the Mid-West offensive: The stop in Benin was the beginning of the error. . . . My plan for that operation was that by half past five in the morning, the Biafran troops would be in the peripheries of Lagos.14 A counterpoint can be obtained from the Nigerian general Olusegun Obasanjos memoir My Command: An Account of the Nigerian Civil War, 1967 1970. In it Obasanjo creates some doubts as to whether or not Victor Banjo intentionally refused to proceed farther to Ibadan and Lagos as directed: A renowned social critic . . . and [I] discussed Banjos request for me to grant him unhindered access to Ibadan and Lagos at any price. Both the request and the price were turned down. So did Banjo, without Ojukwus consent, make a tactical decision not to proceed beyond Ore after the military intelligence available to him demonstrated that it could be a suicide mission? Was Victor Banjo a traitor or a misunderstood hero? I think posterity will debate this question for a long time, because Banjo was subsequently executed by Ojukwu and did not leave written documents to prove or disprove his innocence.15 Gowon Regroups Following the Biafran invasion of the Mid-West, Gowon reorganized his war strategy. He placed some of his best military personnel in three key roles as part of his agenda to crush the Biafrans. Mohammed Shuwa was commander in charge of the First Division of the federal army. His orders were to advance from Northern Nigeria with his troops to take the Biafran towns of Nsukka and Ogoja.1 Colonel Murtala Muhammed, in charge of Division Two, had marching orders to retake Benin and the other parts of the Mid-West occupied by the Biafran army, and then cross the River Niger into Onitsha. Finally, Division Three of the Nigerian army, led by Benjamin Adekunle (aka the black scorpion), would commandeer a southern offensive.2 Three months later the Nigerian forces, now more organized and armed to the teeth with British weapons, had staged a successful counteroffensive. The Biafrans were now in full retreat.3 The Nigerian army pushed back the Biafrans and arrived at the outskirts of the Republic of Benin in September 1967, led by Murtala Muhammed. His Second Infantry Division mounted a resurgent attack from two frontsdefending their advance and pushing forward in a classic Greek army offensive.4 The retreating Biafran forces, according to several accounts, allegedly beat up a number of Mid-Westerners who they believed had served as saboteurs. Nigerian radio reports claimed that the Biafrans shot a number of innocent civilians as they fled the advancing federal forces.5 As disturbing as these allegations are, I have found no credible corroboration of them. The Asaba Massacre The federal forces were soon able to snatch Benin from Biafran military hands and advance quickly toward the River Niger, arriving in Asaba in early October 1967. There are multiple versions of what transpired in Asaba. The version I heard amounted to this: Murtala Muhammedchief commander (GOC) Division Twoand his lieutenants, including Colonel Ibrahim Haruna, felt humiliated by the Biafran Mid-Western offensive. Armed with direct orders to retake the occupied areas at all costs, this division rounded up and shot as many defenseless Igbo men and boys as they could find. Some reports place the death toll at five hundred, others as high as one thousand.1 The Asaba Massacre, as it would be known, was only one of many such postpogrom atrocities committed by Nigerian soldiers during the war. It became a particular abomination for Asaba residents, as many of those killed were titled Igbo chiefs and common folk alike, and their bodies were disposed of with reckless abandon in mass graves, without regard to the wishes of the families of the victims or the towns ancient traditions.2 His Holiness Pope Paul VI, having received no commitments from either the Nigerians or the Biafrans for a cease-fire, sent his emissary, the well-regarded Monsignor Georges Rocheau, to Nigeria on a fact-finding mission. The horrified Roman Catholic priest spoke to the French newspaper Le Monde following the visit, recounting what he witnessed: There has been genocide, for example on the occasion of the 1966 massacres. . . . Two areas have suffered badly [from the fighting]. Firstly the region between the towns of Benin and Asaba where only widows and orphans remain, Federal troops having for unknown reasons massacred all the men.3 General Gowon broke his silence thirty-five years later on this matter and apologized for this atrocity to the Igbos in Asaba: It came to me as a shock when I came to know about the unfortunate happenings that happened to the sons and daughters . . . of [Asaba] domain. I felt very touched and honestly I referred to [the killings] and ask for forgiveness being the one who was in charge at that time. Certainly, it is not something that I would have approved of in whatsoever. I was made ignorant of it, I think until it appeared in the papers. A young man wrote a book at that time.4 Testifying at the Justice Oputa Panel (a Nigerian version of South Africas Truth and Reconciliation Commission), Major General Ibrahim Haruna, belligerent and unremorseful as ever, proclaimed: As the commanding officer and leader of the troops that massacred 500 men in Asaba, I have no apology for those massacred in Asaba, Owerri, and Ameke-Item. I acted as a soldier maintaining the peace and unity of Nigeria. . . . If General Yakubu Gowon apologized, he did it in his own capacity. As for me I have no apology.5 Murtala Muhammed advanced quickly following the abomination in Asaba to cross the Niger River Bridge to Onitsha. Muhammeds federal troops sustained many casualties in that guerrilla warfare, and from sniper attacks by Achuzias Biafran troops, and they failed to take the market town in the first attempt. Biafran Repercussions The exhausted, fleeing Biafran soldiers crossed the River Niger and arrived in Enugu, Biafras capital. Their actions had unanticipated consequences. Ojukwu, nursing the wounds of, as he saw it, a self-inflicted defeat, summarily courtmartialed the leaders of the exercise. The accused menBrigadier Victor Banjo, Major Emmanuel Ifeajuna, Sam Agbamuche, and Major Phillip Alalewere found guilty of planning a coup dtat to overthrown Ojukwus regime, a treasonable felony punishable by death. All four men were executed on September 25, 1967.1 It is important to point out that at the time Enugu had a conspiratorial atmosphere, and some in Ojukwus inner circle added fuel to the fire. There was talk of alleged plots to overthrow the government. Rumors swirled that Major Ifeajuna, a mastermind of the January 15, 1966, coup, was spotted by Biafran intelligence in covert meetings with British secret service agents. Others alleged that the British had paid Victor Banjo a large commissionto the tune of several thousand poundsto bungle the Mid-Western advance. Such was the climate of fear and paranoia.2 Blood, Blood, Everywhere The Biafrans found themselves under heavy assault after the Mid-West offensive. Mohammed Shuwas First Army Division, advancing with Theophilus Danjuma, quickly overran the university town of Nsukka, and then relentlessly bombarded Biafras capital with heavy armaments. The military operation was aided by Egyptian mercenary pilots flying the Nigerian armys brand-new British, Czech L-29 Delphins, and Soviet MiG-17 and Ilyushin Beagle II-28 aircraft. Most of us in the civilian population had fled with family members into the hinterlands, ahead of the advancing Nigerian troops. By the second week of October 1967, overwhelmed by the Nigerian military pounding, the Biafran central government also receded southward, to Umuahia, where a new capital was set up.1 By now the world had started taking notice, and a number of international organizations were visiting Nigeria to try to broker a peace between the two warring parties. One of the first to intervene was the Organization of African Unity (OAU), which appointed Ghanaian lieutenant general Joseph Arthur Ankrah their emissary to Biafra. Ankrah had some experience with the conflict, having hosted the Aburi meeting in January. Many Biafrans, myself included, had mixed feelings about the OAUs choice, as Ankrah, widely regarded as a Cold War pawn, was the man responsible for deposing one of the heroes of the African liberation struggleKwame Nkrumah. It was little surprise to those of us in Biafra, therefore, to discover that under his guidance the OAU supported a unified Nigeria stance despite Biafras protests. The Calabar Massacre The Nigerian forces overran Calabar in early 1968 without much resistance or investment. A seat of the ancient kingdom of the same name, Calabar is in the southeastern part of Biafra, on the banks of the majestic Calabar River. It had for decades been a melting pot of EasternersEfik, Ibibio, Igbo, and othersthat had produced a beautiful cultural mosaic of traditions and dialects. In actions reminiscent of the Nazi policy of eradicating Jews throughout Europe just twenty years earlier, the Nigerian forces decided to purge the city of its Igbo inhabitants.1 By the time the Nigerians were done they had shot at least 1,000 and perhaps 2,000 Ibos [sic], most of them civilians.2 There were other atrocities, throughout the region. In Oji River, The Times of London reported on August 2, 1968, the Nigerian forces opened fire and murdered fourteen nurses and the patients in the wards.3 In Uyo and Okigwe more innocent lives were lost to the brutality and blood lust of the Nigerian soldiers.4 In April 1968, the Nigerians decided to mount a major strategic and tactical offensive designed to cut Biafra off from the seacoast. The over forty thousand troops of the Third Division, lead by army colonel Benjamin Adekunle, engaged in an amphibious, land, and air onslaught on the Niger River Delta city of Port Harcourt. After several weeks of sustained air, land, and sea pounding, a period reportedly characterized by military atrocitiesrapes, looting, outright brigandryPort Harcourt fell to the Nigerians on May 12, 1968. The Third Division slowly marched north, crossing the Imo River, toward the market town of Aba. With heavy casualties along the way, Adekunle and his men shot gleefully through a fierce Biafran resistance and took Aba in August and Owerri in September. The Aba offensive was particularly gruesome: On entry into Aba, the Nigerian soldiers massacred more than 2000 civilians. Susan Masid of the French Press Agency reporting this horrifying incident had this to say: Young Ibos [sic] with terrifying eyes and trembling lips told journalists in Aba that in the villages Nigerian troops came from behind, shooting and firing everywhere, shooting everybody who was running, firing into the homes. (Emphases in original.)5 Colonel Adekunle, no doubt a Nigerian war hero, had by now earned a reputation, at least in Biafran quarters, for cruelty and sadism. After a number of provocative public statements illustrating his zeal for warfare, coupled with verbal clashes with international journalists and observer teams, Adekunle became the subject of the local and international spotlight. I was told, away from the media glare, that his conduct became a source of embarrassment for Gowons wartime cabinet. Perhaps Adekunles most heinous statement during the war was this: [Biafran aid is] misguided humanitarian rubbish. . . . If children must die first, then that is too bad, just too bad.6 That statement caused such an international uproar that the federal government of Nigeria found itself in the unenviable position of having to apologize for the actions not only of Adekunle but also of Haruna, leader of the Asaba Massacre infamy. Unbeknownst to Adekunle, a quiet retirement from the Nigerian army was in the offing.7 I have often thought of the man who returns after an operationthis is what it is called, an operationand has a wash and goes into the bar of his hotel and drinks whiskey. He has been on an operation, and on the other side you have maybe 120 people cut to pieces. A friend of mine had his three childrenjust like that, they went out to buy booksfive minutes later, it was overit does not take long10 seconds. It is quite frightening.8  Meanwhile, on the northeastern front, Mohammed Shuwas First Division easily overran Abakaliki and Afikpo.9 Umuahia was the only major urban area in the secessionist republic that had not been overtaken by the Nigerians. Gowon rapidly increased the size of his army to well over a quarter of a million men and women. His final offensive, which would be mounted on the three fronts that surrounded the Biafrans, was supposed to end the war swiftly, in three months. As he advanced for what he thought was to be a final push to claim a Biafran surrender in September 1968, he was met by fierce Biafran resistancesniper fire and guerrilla warfare.10 Several unanticipated events coalesced to form a perfect storm that bought the exhausted Biafran army much needed time to regroup, repair the much damaged Uli airstrip, and develop a defensive strategy. Antiwar sentiment worldwide was reaching a peak. Bombarded constantly with war imagery through their television sets and newspapers, particularly pictures of babies and women perishing and starving, several individuals and international human rights agencies started mounting demonstrations in world capitalsLondon, Washington, Lisbonagainst the war. Jean-Paul Sartre and Franois Mauriac in France11 and John Lennon in London made public statements condemning the war. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., long a champion of universal justice, had to suddenly cancel his planned trip to Nigeria over fears for his safety. Joan Baez and Jimi Hendrix were some of the famous musicians who took part in a Biafran relief concert in Manhattan, on August 29, 1968. Other British and American artists led peaceful protests of song to draw American public attention to the conflict. The newscasters in America were mesmerized by the story of a young college student, Bruce Mayrock, who set himself on fire to protest the killing of innocent Biafran babies. Mayrock, sadly, later died in the hospital from his wounds. It was reported that he wanted to draw the attention of the media, delegates in session at the United Nations, and United States government officials to what he believed was genocide in Biafra.12 Henry Kissinger, now under heavy pressure from civil society groups, found himself encouraging the Nixon administration to rethink their policy on the Nigeria-Biafra conflict.13 BIAFRA, 1969 First time Biafra Was here, were told, it was a fine Figure massively hewn in hardwood. Voracious white ants Set upon it and ate Through its huge emplaced feet To the great heart abandoning A furrowed, emptied scarecrow. And sun-stricken waves came and beat crazily About its feet eaten hollow Till crashing facedown in a million fragments It was floated gleefully away To cold shorescartographers alone Marking the coastline Of that forgotten massive stance. In our time it came again In pain and acrid smell Of powder. And furious wreckers Emboldened by half a millennium Of conquest, battering On new oil dividends, are now At its black throat squeezing Blood and lymph down to Its hands and feet Bloated by quashiokor. Must Africa have To come a third time?1 The Republic of Biafra THE INTELLECTUAL FOUNDATION OF A NEW NATION For most of us within Biafra our new nation was a dream that had become reality a republic, in the strict definition of the word: a state in which the supreme power rests in the body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by representatives chosen directly or indirectly by them.1 We could forge a new nation that respected the freedoms that all of mankind cherished and were willing to fight hard to hold on to. Within Biafra the Biafran people would be free of persecution of all kinds. It did not escape Biafras founders that a great nation needed to be built on a strong intellectual foundation. Our modest attempt to put the beginnings of our thinking down on paper resulted in what would be known as the Ahiara Declaration.2 In the Harmattan Season of 1968, Ojukwu invited me to serve on a small political committee that the Ministry of Information was creating. The Ministry of Information was the only place that an author would be comfortable, he told me, because that was the venue of intellectual debatewhere philosophy, cultural matters, literature, politics, and society with all its elements were discussed. The ministry had to play an important role in the new nation, he insisted, as Biafra tried to free itself from the faults it saw in Nigeria. So I joined this group and set to work. The questions that we raised within the committee and later presented for broader discussion included: How would we win this war and begin the creation of a new nation with the qualities we seek? What did we want Biafra to look like? What would be the core components of our new nation-state? What did we mean by citizenship and nationhood? What would be Biafras relationship to other African countries? What kind of education would the general population need to aid Biafras development? How would Biafra attain these lofty goals? The Biafran leader was pleased with the committees work and invited me to serve as the chairman of a larger committee that he wanted to set up within the state house. He called this new group the National Guidance Committee, and our business would be to write a kind of constitution for Biafraa promulgation of the fundamental principles upon which the government and people of Biafra would operate. The final work would be a living document that could be modified over time and include at its core a set of philosophical rules that would serve as a guide for the people of Biafra. The Biafran nation, Ojukwu explained, had to have special attributesthe very principles that we approved of and were fighting for: unity, self-determination, social justice, etc. The final version of the document, we hoped, would also tell our story to the worldhow Biafra had been pushed out of Nigeria by Nigerians and threatened with genocide. The only thing left for persecuted Easterners to do, we would stress, was to establish our own state and avert destruction. That, essentially, was the basis of the establishment of the Biafran nation. Ojukwu then told me that he wanted the new committee to report directly to him, outside the control of the cabinet. I became immediately apprehensive. I was concerned that this arrangement could very easily become an area of conflict between the cabinet and this new committee that I was going to head. Who would be reporting to whom? And it seemed to me that Ojukwu wanted a hold on the organs of governmentthese two organs, plus the militarynot so much separated but working at a pace and manner of his design. Nevertheless, I went ahead and chose a much larger committee of experts for the task at hand. I asked Ojukwu who he had in mind to be members of this larger committee. Several names were thrown about. Finally we arrived at quite an impressive group: Chieka Ifemesia, Ikenna Nzimiro, Justice A. N. Aniagolu, Dr. Ifegwu Eke, and Eyo Bassey Ndem.3 But the group still lacked a scribe and secretary. There was a healthy competition for the position between Professor Ben Obumselu, who was an Oxford graduate like Ojukwu, and Professor Emmanuel Obiechina, who held a PhD from Cambridge University. I remember telling Ojukwu that Obiechina was educated in Cambridge, and he said, in the tradition of classic Oxbridge rivalry, Oh, he is from the other place, and we all laughed. In the end, Emmanuel Obiechina was appointed scribe and secretary.  The work of the National Guidance Committee eventually produced the treatise widely known as the Ahiara Declaration. It was called Ahiara because Ojukwus headquarters at this time was a camouflaged colonial building in the village of Ahiara. Ojukwu was in hiding at that point of the hostilities. The retreats he had before, in Umuahia and Owerri, which became famously referred to as Ojukwu bunkers, were no longer available to him, having been bombed by the Nigerian army. The concept of the Ahiara Declaration was taken from a similar one issued by President Julius Nyerere in Tanzania, called the Arusha Declaration. The importance of Julius Nyerere in Africa at that time was immense. Nyerere particularly caught the attention of African scholars because he stood for the things we believed inequality, self-determination, respect for human values. I particularly liked how he drew inspiration from traditional African values and philosophy. He was admired by all of us not just because of his reputation as an incorruptible visionary leader endowed with admirable ideological positions, but also because he had shown great solidarity for our cause. He was, after all, the first African head of state to recognize Biafra. Though we shared an admiration for President Nyerere and the Arusha Declaration, members of the National Guidance Committee came to work with diverse political beliefs, backgrounds, and influences; we did not all come from the same ideological or political school of thought. There were those on the committee who admired the American, British, and French notions of democracy. There were those who harbored socialist, even communist, views, who were influenced by the writings of Marcus Garvey, Karl Marx, Vladimir Lenin, Fidel Castro, and the Argentine physician and Marxist revolutionary Ernesto Che Guevera. Others liked local intellectuals such as the centrist socialist Julius Nyerere, Patrice Lumumba, and Kwame Nkrumah. And still others like me preferred democratic institutions not in the purely Western sense but in a fusion of the good ideas of the West with the best that we had produced in our own ancient African civilizations. In my case, I drew heavily on my background in literature, history, and theology. I also tapped into what I call the observation of my realityan extension of the things taught in the formal education of secondary school and university into the education from life I picked up from our tradition. One influential group were the orators, a group that fascinated me because they always seemed to be able to find the right things to say to stop a crisis! I looked out for people like that, who embodied a wholesome African wisdomAfrican common sense; they were within our communities, and within the group that would be called the uneducated. But they were arbiters of the traditional values that had sustained our societies from the beginning of time. One man, an Ozo title holder whose eloquence I always remembered, personified what I thought was the essence of what we were trying to write and should try to communicate. I remember distinctly watching as Okudo Onenyi, with his fellow Ozo title holders, dressed in their impressive traditional regalia, red caps and feathers, assembled for one of their Ozo meetings. One of the things that struck me was the dignity of these old men, who arrived at the site of the gathering carrying their little chairs that they would sit on. At one particular meeting Okudo Onenyi was given a piece of chalk to mark his insignia on the mud floor or wall, as these men were wont to do. What surprised me was that Okudo took the piece of chalk and put down his initials. I did not realize that this man had gone to school, but he obviously had. My admiration for him rose, because he was one of those who was not easily persuaded to abandon his ancient traditions, like the rest, to join a new culture or religion, but he was willing to make a type of accommodation to his worlds new dispensation. This man represented those who were still holding fort and not putting up a physical fight. So it was not enough in my view to state that we wanted to be radical and create a left-wing manifesto, but we also certainly did not want to be right wing. It was that ancient traditional virtue I wanted to channel into the Ahiara Declaration. It took us several weeks to get the work we had done into one document. We worked day and night. Chieka Ifemesia, Emmanuel Obiechina, and I did the editing after the committee had spent days brooding over our situation and prospects. Chieka Ifemesia, an emeritus professor at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, and a leading authority on Igbo history, would come to the table with much more than his own memories or abstract intellectual concepts, but with a great deal of relevant historical background and context. He was a solid historian serious, studious. He came from my own village of Ikenga in Ogidi. At the time of the war he was regarded as a rising intellectual star and a person who many of us relied upon for intellectual and cultural stimulation and ideas. Emmanuel Obiechina pulled all the ideas together and transcribed the committees work. My role was to keep some kind of control over the radical elements in the group who had more extreme left-wing thinking, for instance, the popular firebrand professor Ikenna Nzimiro.4 Nzimiro always had trouble with the establishment from his Nnamdi Azikiwe youth wing Zikist days. He did not like the direction Nigeria was going in, and he had no trouble expressing his dissenting views. He was perhaps the youngest representative on the local government council in those days, and he was very well-known everywhere for his radical positions. He was educated in Germany and England, and his escapades were legendary. His stories kept us all laughing for weeks. Nzimiro disappeared in the middle of our writing the Ahiara Declaration, and we were all very concerned. One day we were informed that the police had locked him up. Apparently he had gotten into an argument with a police officer who did not care for his radical views. Insults were exchanged and Nzimiro was subsequently arrested. Emmanuel Obiechina told me what was going on. So we went to Ojukwu and informed him of what was happening to a member of our committee. Ojukwu called the chief of police, and we went to the police station to pick up our ultraradical colleague. On June 1, 1969, very close to the end of the war, Ojukwu finally delivered this major speech, the Ahiara Declaration. It was an attempt to capture the meaning of the struggle for Biafran sovereignty. He provided a historical overview of the events that had led to the secession from Nigeria and the founding of the Republic of Biafra. The speech was as notable for its concentration on a number of issues that Biafra stood forsuch as the rights to liberty, safety, excellence, and self-determinationas it was for the things the republic was against: genocide, racism, imperialism, and ethnic hatred, which were squarely condemned. The speech also decried the blockade of Biafra imposed by the federal government of Nigeria that was creating an avoidable humanitarian crisis, particularly among children, who were dying in the hundreds daily, and attacked the support of Nigeria by the major world powers. The day this declaration was published and read by Ojukwu was a day of celebration in Biafra. My late brother Frank described the effect of this Ahiara Declaration this way: Odika si gbabia agbaba (It was as if we should be dancing to what Ojukwu was saying). People listened from wherever they were. It sounded right to them: freedom, quality, self-determination, excellence. Ojukwu read it beautifully that day. He had a gift for oratory. The Biafran State I would like to say something about the structure of the Biafran state. The Republic of Biafra took its name from the Bight of Biafra, the vast expanse of water covering the continental shelf into which the Niger River empties before flowing into the Gulf of Biafra. After Biafras surrender that body of water was renamed the Gulf of Guinea. The origins of the word Biafra are difficult to trace, although historical records point to Portuguese writings from the sixteenth century that it may have been derived from. The republics capital was initially Enugu, a metropolis of over one hundred thousand at the time. It was also known as the coal city, a reference to the nearby Onyeama Coal Mines and other coal deposits that once served as the fuel that drove a large part of the Nigerian economy. Enugu was also the old administrative capital of the Eastern Region. A well-planned, sedate capital, it had a pleasant climate and the advantages of all the amenities of an important urban center without the pathologies of a large conurbation. When Enugu fell to the Nigerian army on October 4, 1967, the administrative capital of Biafra was moved to Umuahia. Following the capture of Umuahia on April 22, 1969, Biafras capital was moved once again, to Owerri, the last administrative seat before the end of the war in January 1970.1 The population of Biafra in June 1967 was just under fifteen million people, and it was home to a large number of ethnic groups in addition to the Igbo, who made up about 65 percent of the population. The other major groups were the Efik, Ibibio, Ijaw, and Ikwerre. Others included the Andoni, Agbo, Degema, Egbema, Eket, Ekoi, Ibeno, Ikom, Iyalla, Kana, Mbembe, Uyanga, and Yako.2 Biafra was divided initially into eleven administrative provinces with as many administrators. Later that number was expanded to twenty.3 Once secession was declared it became clear that the war effort required a great deal of military equipmentartillery, planes, boats, tanks, guns, grenades, mines, bombs, etc. Biafra needed a means to access foreign exchange and a legal tender for commerce. One of the first things the new government did was to establish the Bank of Biafra. The Bank of Biafra was located in Enugu until the city fell in October 1967, and then it was moved several times to different locations all over Igbo land, with the seat of government. The banks first governor was Dr. Sylvester Ugoh.4 The legal tender produced by the institution in January 1968 was designed by Simon Okeke and other talented local artists.5 The first denominations were the five shilling and one pound notes. About a year later, the ten, five, and one pound as well as the ten and five shilling notes were issued. The currency was widely accepted in Biafra, although it was unavailable in large quantities, which quickly made it a prized possession. Despite its usefulness, it was not a recognized legal tender beyond Biafras borders and could not be used for foreign exchange. This dilemma produced a number of challenges for the Biafran government, which, we were told, used private bank accounts of wealthy Biafrans to perform transactions abroad. THE BIAFRAN FLAG The flag of the Republic of Biafra was based on the Pan-Africanist teachings of Marcus Garvey and the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL). Garvey was a towering and controversial figure, a major Pan-Africanist thinker and civil rights pioneer at the beginning of the twentieth century, and his philosophy, known as Garveyism, was widely admired by many Africans. It was Garveys organization that first came up with the tricolored morphology of the Pan-African flag, with three horizontal bands, red, black, and green, to symbolize the common ancestry and political aspirations of all black people around the world. Kenya, St. Kitts and Nevis, and Malawi are just some of the many African and Caribbean nations that adopted variations of this flag. The red in Garveys conception highlighted the blood that links all people of African ancestry, as well as blood shed during slavery and liberation struggles around the globe. In the Biafran context it was used to represent blood shed during the pogroms and the quest for independence. The black was seen as the affirmation of an African nation State by the UNIA-ACL. In Biafra, it was a symbolic ancestral connection to souls of years past. The green in both Garveys and Biafras concepts stood for Africas abundant natural wealth and resources, and its radiant future. The Biafran flag also highlighted these aspirations with a rising golden sun and rays representing the eleven original provinces in the republic.6 THE BIAFRAN NATIONAL ANTHEM The Nigeria-Biafra War led to an explosion of musical, lyrical, and poetic creativity and artistry. Biafras founders tapped into this energy and commissioned a number of regimental drills, duty songs, and cadences7 that they hoped would spur armies to victory and excite the populace to political and economic vitality.8 The Biafran national anthem, Land of the Rising Sun, was based on a powerful poem by Nigerias first president, Nnamdi Azikiwe, called Onitsha Ado NIdu: Land of the Rising Sun.9 Laced with irony, the poem contained several phrases that would become all too prophetic: But if the price is death for all we hold dear, / Then let us die without a shred of fear. . . . / Spilling our blood well count a privilege; . . . / We shall remember those who died in mass; . . .10 The anthem was set to the beautiful music of the Finnish composer Jean Sibelius11Finlandia (Be Still My Soul)a personal favorite of, and calculated choice by, Ojukwu, in reference to the Nordic countrys resistance to foreign domination.12 Later, after Azikiwe withdrew his support for the breakaway republic, we would learn that there was some controversy over the adaptation of Azikiwes poetry. According to Zik, Ojukwu had used his work without permission, a charge the Biafran head of state vigorously denied.13 The Biafra National Anthem LAND OF THE RISING SUN14 Land of the rising sun, we love and cherish, beloved homeland of our brave heroes; we must defend our lives or we shall perish, We shall protect our hearth from all our foes; but if the price is death for all we hold dear, Then let us die without a shred of fear. Hail to Biafra, consecrated nation, Oh fatherland, this is our solemn pledge: Defending thee shall be a dedication, spilling our blood well count a privilege; The waving standard which emboldens the free shall always be our flag of liberty. We shall emerge triumphant from this ordeal, and through the crucible unscathed well pass; When we are poised the wounds of battle to heal, we shall remember those who died in mass; Then shall our trumpets peal the glorious song of victory we scored oer might and wrong. Oh God, protect us from the hidden pitfall, Guide all our movements lest we go astray; Give us the strength to heed the humanist call: To give and not to count the cost each day; Bless those who rule to serve with resoluteness, to make this clime a land of righteousness.15 THE MILITARY Biafra had only two thousand troops at the beginning of the war. Most of the soldiers were former Nigerian army soldiersEasterners who were based in Enugu and other former Nigerian military bases in the east. General Philip Effiong, Biafras chief of general staff, quickly recruited an additional twenty thousand men and created a separate Biafran militia of civilian volunteers, who received on-the-spot training. The Biafrans were devoid of any heavy military equipment apart from that of the former Nigerian battalion stationed in Enugu, Saracen armored cars, and 105 millimeter howitzers.16 Federick Forsyth recalls in an excellent BBC documentary, Biafra: Fighting a War Without Guns, that Biafran soldiers marched into war one man behind the other because they had only one rifle between them, and the thinking was that if one soldier was killed in combat the other would pick up the only weapon available and continue fighting.17 The Biafrans were completely outgunned compared to the Nigerians. The Soviet Union and Britain not only supplied Nigeria with brand-new MIG-17 and II-28 Beagle (Ilyushin) jets but also with Soviet T-34 battle tanks, antiaircraft guns, AK-47 rifles, machine guns, grenades, mines, bombs, etc.18 In light of this imbalance of resources, international support for Biafra was crucial. Arguably the most notable of all the Europeans that came to the aid of Biafra was Carl Gustaf von Rosen. He was a Swedish nobleman and World War II veteran. Von Rosen became a legend in the 1930s when he volunteered to fly Red Cross relief supplies into Ethiopia and fight for Emperor Haile Selassie against the Italians.19 He again came into the worlds consciousness as the pilot of the much admired United Nations secretary general Dag Hammarskjld, who was widely regarded as a dove of peace. Hammarskjld mysteriously died in an air crash while serving as the chief mediator of the Congo crisis of the 1960s, unfortunately at a time when his much trusted pilot, von Rosen, was ill. It was von Rosens Biafran involvement, however, that truly catapulted him to worldwide recognition. Von Rosen was outraged by the injustice of the war and Nigerias imposition of an economic blockade on the Republic of Biafra, and he was moved to come to the aid of the suffering. It was in part because of this brave mans involvement that the world was motivated to pay attention to this conflict in a heretofore forgotten part of the world. Von Rosen bore witness to the atrocities and humanitarian emergency in Biafra, and his public statements and influence propelled a number of Western relief agencies to respond to the crisis.20 He led multiple relief flights with humanitarian aid into Uli airportBiafras chief airstrip. Fed up with Nigerian air force interference with his peaceful missions, he entered the war heroes hall of fame after leading a five-plane assault on Nigerian aircraft in Port Harcourt, Benin City, Ughelli, Enugu, and some other locations. He took the Nigerian air force by total surprise and destroyed several Soviet-supplied aircraft in the process.21 The Biafran air force was composed of a B-26, a B-25, and three helicopters22 until Carl Gustaf von Rosen23 came to the republics assistance in 1968. By years end the government of Biafra had procured a moderate amount of military ammunition from the neighboring former French colonies of Ivory Coast and Gabon. Indeed, Pariss ambassador to Gabon at the time of war, Maurice Delauney, worked with Jacques Foccarts deputy, Jean Mauricheau-Beauprdescribed by French journalist Pierre Pan as the chief conductor of clandestine French support to the Biafran secessioniststo supply arms to Ojukwus army.24 Uli airport was the major airport in Biafra for military and relief goods at the height of the war, and it was described by various authorities as one of the busiest airports in Africa, with more than 50 flights a night.25 Uli airport, originally part of a major highway, had been cut into the countryside in the middle of a tropical rainforest and operated mainly at night. I recall the airports traffic control terminal, passenger facilities, and hangars were constructed in such a manner that the entire runway and all of the planes on the ground could be heavily camouflaged with palm leaves and raffia fronds during the day, disguising it from Nigerian army aircraft reconnaissance missions and radar.26 At night the airport became a beehive of activity. Incoming flights carrying relief supplies, particularly from international locations such as So Tom, Abidjan in Ivory Coast, and Libreville, Gabon, were given the airports coordinates after appropriate background checks were done. Pilots who were involved in the airlifts of relief supplies provided a compelling story: In the middle of the vast expanse of tropical rainforest, we would be told to descend from our cruising altitude to about two thousand feet to avoid enemy fire, barely atop the forest in the pitch dark. All of a sudden, bright floodlights appeared from nowhere, illuminating the forest floor. Right before us was a breathtaking sightan entire airport appearing from nowhere!27 OGBUNIGWE The economic blockade enforced by Gowon led to great ingenuity and some unprecedented innovations. Biafran scientists from the research think tank RAP the Biafran Research and Production unitdeveloped a great number of rockets, bombs, and telecommunications gadgets, and devised an ingenious indigenous strategy to refine petroleum.28 Still, some of these innovations deserve particular attention, though in doing so I would like to make it crystal clear that I abhor violence, and a discussion of weapons of war does not imply that I am a war enthusiast or condone violence. Perhaps no more important instrument of war lay at the disposal of the Biafrans than the bomb called Ogbunigwe. Gordian Ezekwe, Benjamin Chukwuka Nwosu, and the less well-known technician Willy Achukwe were among the group of originators of this notorious weapon. Ogbunigwe would later become widely adopted and manufactured by the RAP engineers. The bomb was a complex three-chamber apparatus that often included delayed action devices containing a propellant, an explosive substanceoften gunpowder in an igniting baseand scraps of metal for maximal effect. Ogbunigwe bombs struck great terror in the hearts of many a Nigerian soldier, and were used to great effect by the Biafran army throughout the conflict.29 The novelist Vincent Chukwuemeka Ike captures the hysteria and dread evoked by it in a passage in his important book Sunset at Dawn: A Novel about Biafra: When the history of this war comes to be written, the ogbunigwe [sic] and the shore batteries will receive special mention as Biafras greatest saviors. Weve been able to wipe out more Nigerians with those devices than with any imported weapons. . . . You must have heard that the Nigerians are now so mortally afraid of ogbunigwe [sic] that each advancing battalion is now preceded by a herd of cattle.30 BIAFRAN TANKS The first Biafran tanks turned out to be steel-reinforced Range Rovers. By their third incarnation these armored fighting vehicles, or AFVs, had become quite sophisticated, with rocket launchers added. Let me give one more dimension of what we were hoping to do in Biafra, and what this freedom and independence was supposed to be like. We were told, for instance, that technologically we would have to rely for a long, long time on the British and the West for everything. European oil companies insisted that oilindustry technology was so complex that we would never ever in the next five hundred years be able to figure it out. We knew that wasnt true. In fact, we learned to refine our own oil during the two and a half years of the struggle, because we were blockaded. We were able to demonstrate that it was possible for African people, entirely on their own, to refine oil.31 We were able to show that Africans could pilot their own planes. There is a story, perhaps apocryphal, that a Biafran plane landed in another African country, and the pilot and all of the crew came out, and there was not a white man among them. The people of this other countrywhich is a stooge of France couldnt comprehend a plane being landed without any white people. They said, Where is the pilot? Where are the white people? They arrested the crew, presuming there had been a rebellion in the air! There was enough talent, enough education in Nigeria for us to have been able to arrange our affairs more efficiently, more meticulously, even if not completely independently, than we were doing.32 I tell these stories to illustrate the quality of the people available to Nigeria. One thinks back on this and is amazed. Nigeria had people of great quality, and what befell usthe corruption, the political ineptitude, the warwas a great disappointment and truly devastating to those of us who witnessed it.33 A TIGER JOINS THE ARMY A great shot in the arm, and perhaps the single most effective tool for enlistment into the Biafran army, came in January 1968, when Richard Ihetu, also known as Dick Tiger, hung up his boxing gloves and enlisted in the army. Ihetu was a world-renowned boxer from Amaigbo in Imo statethe land of the Igbosa town comprised of thirty-seven villages and steeped in ancient Igbo history.34 Ojukwu made Dick Tiger a lieutenant in the army of Biafra as soon as he enlisted.35 Even though I was never a boxing fan, I remember how the whole of Nigeria was gripped by a feverish excitement at Dick Tigers victories, first locally, as Nigerias most celebrated boxing champion, then also later, after he emigrated to the United Kingdom and knocked over famous boxers across the British Empire, and ultimately won world championships both as a light-heavyweight and as a middleweight. We were all very impressed that this young man from a town near Aba in Imo state had traveled so far.36 Dick Tigers decision to enlist, and to return the MBE (Member of the British Empire) medal to Great Britains government in protest of its support for Nigeria, caused a great stir internationally.37 Excitement at the news of Dick Tigers arrival created a rippling sensation throughout Biafra. The government seized on this development and created jingles on the radio summoning young men to follow the example of Dick Tiger and join the great Elephant (Enyi) of a new nation. But the realities of warthe death, the despair, the sufferingsoon dampened any euphoria that we all had about having a champion fight for the cause. FREEDOM FIGHTERS Ojukwu created an organization called the Biafran Organization of Freedom Fighters (BOFF) as a unit that would improve the overall relationship between the Biafran army and the people it served and on whose behalf it fought. Colonel Ejike Obumneme Aghanya was appointed the chairperson. He had been president of the Nigerian Broadcasting Service Staff Union in Enugu when I was the controller of the Nigerian Broadcasting Service Eastern Region. Aghanyas BOFF staff included Dr. Ukwu I. Ukwu, Dr. Oyolu, and Major Okoye. Aghanya invited me to join the group and help develop an education strategy that would improve civilian-military relations. Although this desire to bridge the civilian-military divide is nothing new, Ojukwu wanted the Biafran military to be different, to pay careful attention to the welfare of the people of Biafra. One interesting direction they took was to get young women into BOFF, and indirectly into the army.38 Ojukwus Oxford education afforded him the luxury of having been exposed to both the great world philosophers and the revolutionaries of the day. He was heavily influenced by the writings of Fidel Castro, and he called the Biafran army the Peoples Army of Biafra. He also admired the way the Chinese army was structured, and it is relevant to note that BOFF arose at a time when China was making diplomatic inroads in Biafra. Ojukwu clearly was not a communist, but he borrowed some ideas from their revolutions.39 After I left the BOFF outfit I heard that it was engaged in the more militaristic and controversial aspects of war, such as enemy infiltration, guerrilla warfare, and propaganda.40 Traveling on Behalf of Biafra In addition to working with BOFF, Ojukwu also asked me to serve the cause as an unofficial envoy of the people of Biafra. Being invited to serve by the leader of Biafra was both an important and satisfying opportunity, but it also came with great anxiety. What were we getting into? I thought. I never solicited the post, so being asked from the very top to come and help, especially from the angle of the intellectual, was very important to me. I wasnt absolutely sure how things would work out, but I thought I would do my best. The first trip I undertook on behalf of the people of Biafra was at the direct request of General Ojukwu. He called me to his office soon after the conflict started and asked me to travel to Senegal to deliver a message to President Lopold Sdar Senghor. I was to be accompanied on this trip by a young academic, Sam Agbam, who spoke several European languages fluently. He was among the young intellectuals in the Biafran diplomatic service involved in one way or another in the framing of the Biafran argument. Sam and I set out for Senegal. During these trips for the people envoys were often put on a planea private plane . . . any plane, at midnight, from Uli airport, flying out of Biafra across the Sahara, occasionally to Europe or an African capital, from whence we would travel more freely to the destinations of our choice. During this particular flight the pilot announced at about twenty thousand feet that the plane was experiencing technical problems. It was marked by a great deal of turbulence and sudden losses of cabin pressure. We were all experiencing motion sickness, some were vomiting, and all were stricken by a sense of impending doom. The plane was diverted to an airport in the Sahara, where we disembarked, changed to a Senegalese airline, and flew to Dakar. Sam Agbam vanished at some point during our travel; I was never told why he did not continue the journey. Soon thereafter he got in trouble with the Biafran governmentaccused of being part of a mutinyand was executed with others for allegedly plotting a coup against Ojukwu, as discussed earlier. After we lost each other I decided to take control of the journey, despite the language barrier. I arrived in the beautiful capital of the Republic of Senegal, Dakar, and checked myself into one of the citys many smart hotels. I visited the presidential offices the day after my arrival and tried to get the letter from General Ojukwu in my possession to President Senghor. I couldnt get past the presidential aides. The officials there, all expatriate administrators, responded to my request with looks of incredulity. They could not even imagine anything like opening the door and showing me in to see the Senegalese president. They must have thought I was crazy! There was one very tall man who spoke very good English, and he said to me that there was no way I could see the president. What do you want to see him for? he asked. I said that I would like to present my new novel, A Man of the People, to him. I also added that I knew that President Senghor was a great writer and poet, and I thought I should show my appreciation of his writing by presenting my humble effort at writing poetry. Clearly that was not what I wanted to do, but I was not about to disclose my true intentions to this uncooperative gentleman. Oh, that is easy enough: You give me the book and poems and I will take it to him, and I am sure he will be delighted, the official said. I said that I would like to deliver it myself, that that was the reason I had come all this way. There was nothing more the official could tell me, and I was sent away. The next day, and the next, I went back and repeated the process in an attempt to see Senghor. Either my tenacity was working or the staff was getting tired of seeing me every morning, because I got a new message five days into this ritual: President Lopold Sdar Senghor will see you tomorrow. This message was brought in a black limousine. A member of the hotel staff ran up to my room, knocked on the door, and excitedly relayed that I had a message from the presidential palace. The esteem in which I was held in the eyes of the people and staff in the hotel, you can imagine, rose dramatically. After that my stay was very different. Soon after my arrival I had complained to the hotel front desk that the fan in my room was not working well, but nothing was done about it until the limousine visit from the presidential palace, soon after which I was informed that the fan had been attended to. The next day I had my audience with President Lopold Sdar Senghor, a very extraordinary man. I was guided along a stone path in the gardens of the presidential palace and up the grand staircase to a secluded room. The first thing that struck me was the loneliness. We were standing in a room in this huge mansion, I in my Biafran attire, Senghor in his French suit, and he seemed all alone. He knew that I came from Biafra, in West Africa. I handed Senghor the letter that informed him of the real catastrophe building up in Biafra, and I told him that it was a message from the Biafran head of state, who had asked me to deliver the sealed envelope directly to him. Senghor regretted that I had spent several days in the country trying to reach him and apologized for the treatment I had received. Senghor was a profoundly adept diplomat, and he took on the business I brought: He glanced through the letter quickly, and then turned to me and said that he would deal with it overnight . . . as soon as possible. Our conversation then turned to other things intellectualwriting, education, the great cultural issues of the day, including the movement he was spearheading called Ngritude. La Ngritude, as it was called, was already widely known in serious intellectual circles around the world: The founders of la Ngritude, les trois pres (the three fathers) [Lopold Sdar Senghor; Aim Csaire, from Martinique; and Lon Gontran Damas, from Guyana] met while they were living in Paris in the early 1930s.1  It is important not to view Ngritude in isolation but in the full context of the black consciousness movements of the first half of the twentieth century, a period that gave rise to a number of ideological and intellectual movements in America, the Caribbean, and Africa and a great deal of cross-fertilization and complexity. Ngritude in Africa can be seen as an extension of the earlier work of W. E. B. Du Bois, Booker T. Washington, Marcus Garvey, and C. L. R. James, among others; they all established black intellectual and political liberation struggles but from very different albeit equally important vantage points in America. In the African context it was a reaction to the colonial experience through literature and political thought. It had powerful political allies in Nnamdi Azikiwe in Nigeria, Kwame Nkrumah in Ghana, Jomo Kenyatta in Kenya, Julius Nyerere in Tanzania, Patrice Lumumba in Congo, and, later, Nelson Mandela, Steve Biko, and Walter Sisulu in South Africa. It is pertinent to note that the independence movement in Africa in turn had a profound impact on the civil rights movement in America. I found what these intellectuals were trying to achievethe reclamation of the power of self-definition to recast Africas, and therefore their own, image through the written wordincredibly attractive and influential. Here were highly sophisticated individuals who believed in the need for blacks who had been victims of historical dispossession to appreciate and elevate their culture literature, art, music, dance, etc. They encouraged Africans (in the words broadest definition) to celebrate and espouse their culture as not only not inferior to European culture and civilization but equally acceptable even if fundamentally different. Ngritude also held that the rest of the world would benefit from such an intellectual black renaissance, which would at last produce an environment where race, a core fact of our existence, and the negative baggage linked to its definition and meaning, would be effectively deemphasized, liberating the worlds people to work together unencumbered. It was very heavy stuff indeed!2 It is perhaps a great testament to the importance of this new thinking that it drew admirers as diverse and important as Frantz Fanon (who studied with Aim Csaire), the great French writer Jean-Paul Sartre, and the Haitian writer Jacques Romain, as well as critics such as Wole Soyinka, who famously dismissed it.3 Senghor told me about the education minister who had been trained under him and had submitted a bill to Parliament to abolish the use of all French texts in all institutions of education in Senegal. Senghor smiled and told the young minister, Thank you for your bill, but that would be too much Ngritude. We both laughed, and then talked for about two hoursdiscussing his poetry and that of others from the black diasporaOkigbo, Derek Walcott, Aim Csaire, Langston Hughes, Countee Cullen, etc. He took me to one of the great windows of the presidential palace and showed me two hills; he observed that the mountaintops looked like a lady lying down.  I also made an extensive trip to Scandinavia on behalf of the people of Biafra around this time. The Scandinavians had made great humanitarian gestures to alleviate the suffering in Biafra. I was also curious to visit the land of one of the most legendary of all the Europeans who came to our aidthe Swedish aristocrat Carl Gustaf von Rosen. On this trip I visited Sweden, Finland, and Norway. I remember Norway vividly. Even though I visited during the winter, it appeared a lovely country subdued, calm, and temperate. The people seemed very serious-minded, and businesslike, and very progressive in their thinking. My hosts took me almost immediately after I arrived to the Parliament. What struck me about this particular day was the importance the Norwegians place on time, even more than I had encountered in England. Here was a people that knew that time was critically important, and it was to be used judiciously. Another observation of significance had to do with the items on the program. It appeared to be like a servicea hymn or anthem was sung, followed by deliberations and readingsall in Norwegian, so I cant tell the reader exactly what was being said, but it sounded almost like a religious service. When they were done, I was ushered into this wonderfully built, ornate Parliament room, and a gentleman said to me: Now Mr. Achebe, you can tell us what you came for. And I spent about twenty minutes telling my hosts about the humanitarian disaster that was Biafra. I received a warm round of applause and promises of continued humanitarian support. The other thing that happened during my trip to Norway was, unfortunately for millions around the world, very sad. As I walked back to my hotel with my hosts, I was able to tell from the conspicuous news flashing on a huge screen that Robert Kennedy had been assassinated. I was able to figure out the devastating news from the flashing words, even without help from my hosts, and it struck me how bad news is so much more easily recognizable across languages than good. My trip to Canada was very different from the others. I was invited to speak about the Biafran tragedy by the World Council of Churches and the Canadian Council of Churches. The World Council of Churches was one of the most magnanimous supporters and suppliers of humanitarian relief for the suffering and dying of Biafra, so I felt deeply obliged to attend their gathering. The general secretary of the WCC, Eugene Carson Blake, and the honorary president of the WCC, Willem Visser t Hooft from The Netherlands, were very decent men. Blake, an American, was an ardent supporter of the American civil rights movement and a coauthor of the WCCs antiracism policies. Hooft helped set up the Ecumenical Church Loan Fund for the poor around the world.4 It is important to point out that the Protestants did not hold a monopoly on generosity during the war. Several Jewish groups and Roman Catholic orders also came to the aid of the destitute. Reverend Father (Dr.) Georg Hssler, former president of Caritas International, is particularly celebrated till this day by former Biafrans for his towering role in providing humanitarian and other aid during the conflict. In any case, our hosts, the Canadian Council of Churches, organized a dinner in my honor and invited a number of very distinguished Canadians and religious leaders from around the world. When they brought out the first coursesmoked salmon with steamed spinachEugene Carson Blake announced to the guests that we were about to eat a piece of Uli airport at night, which, many of them at the table were aware, was famously and effectively camouflaged with palm fronds and leaves to hide it from Nigerian air force reconnaissance missions. That statement was greeted with boisterous laughter. It occured to me once again how different Biafra had become from other places, where laughter was still available. In May 1968, I was part of the Biafran delegation that attended the Kampala, Uganda, talksone of the worlds failed attempts (in this case, the British Commonwealth and the OAU) to forge a peace between Nigeria and Biafra. President Milton Obote of Uganda hosted the deliberations that also involved Commonwealth secretary Arnold Smith.5 Sir Louis Mbanefo was the leader of that delegation, which also included Professor Hilary Okam, Francis Ellah, and a few others. It was at that meeting that I met Aminu Kano for the first time. As the Nigerian delegation, led by Anthony Enahoro, espoused their resolve to crush Biafra unless there was a complete surrender, Aminu Kano seemed very uneasy, often looking through the window. This was a man who was not pleased with either side or how the matter was being handled. That meeting made an indelible mark on me about Aminu Kano, about his character and his intellect. In late 1968, I traveled to the United States with Gabriel Okara and Cyprian Ekwensi as part of an extensive university tour to bring the story of Biafra to the mainly progressive American intellectuals and writers. We visited scores of campuses, gave what seemed to be hundreds of interviews, and met with several very influential American leaders of thought. During my visit we were educated about Igbo (Ebo) landing in St. Simons, Georgia. According to the local lore, Ebo Landing was the site where an illfated slave ship called The Wanderer had run aground. The valuable cargothe captured Igboswere taken onshore while the crew rescued what they could from the bowels of the ship. While the crew was distracted, the story continues, the Igbos made a suicide pact, deciding to walk into the ocean and drown themselves rather than allow the slave merchants to sell them into bondage. Locals swear that the shores of the tragedy are still haunted, and that on a clear moon-lit night a visitor who stands really still can hear the howls and agony of death.6 REFUGEE MOTHER AND CHILD (A MOTHER IN A REFUGEE CAMP) No Madonna and Child could touch Her tenderness for a son She soon would have to forget. . . . The air was heavy with odors of diarrhea, Of unwashed children with washed-out ribs And dried-up bottoms waddling in labored steps Behind blown-empty bellies. Most mothers there Had long ceased to care, but not this one; She held a ghost-smile between her teeth, And in her eyes the memory Of a mothers pride. . . . She had bathed him And rubbed him down with bare palms. She took from the bundle of their possessions A broken comb and combed The rust-colored hair left on his skull And thenhumming in her eyesbegan carefully to part it. In their former life this was perhaps A little daily act of no consequence Before his breakfast and school; now she did it Like putting flowers on a tiny grave.1 Life in Biafra The Nigeria-Biafra conflict created a humanitarian emergency of epic proportions. Millions of civiliansgrandparents, mothers, fathers, children, and soldiers alikeflooded the main highway arteries between towns and villages fleeing the chaos and conflict. They traveled by foot, by truck, by car, barefoot, with slippers, in wheelbarrows, many in worn-out shoes. Some had walked so long their soles were blistered and bleeding. As hunger and thirst grew, so did despair, confusion, and desperation. Most were heading in whatever direction the other was headed, propelled by the latest rumors of food and shelter spreading through the multitude like a virus. Refugees were on the move in no specific direction, anywhere, just away from the fighting. As they fled the war zones they became targets of the Nigerian air force. The refugees learned to travel nights and hide in the forests by day. The international relief agencies started responding to the growing humanitarian challenge quite early in the conflict by establishing food distribution centers and refugee camps. There were many Biafran refugee camps dotting the landscape, from Enugu in the north to Owerri in the south, during the thirty-month conflict. Many held between a few hundred and a few thousand people. At the height of the war there were well over three thousand such centers and camps, a great number but woefully inadequate to the actual need.1 These camps were often hastily constructed tent villages set up beside bombed-out churches, in football or sports arenas, or in open fields in the forest. They uniformly lacked electricity, running water, or other comforts. Occasionally, the more established camps had sturdier shelters on the premises of abandoned schools or colleges, or built near freshwater streams or little rivers. Those were few and far between. Most had rows of mud huts and palm raffia roofs built hastily by the inhabitants themselves. They were occasionally fenced in by the international agencies, which placed guards on the camp perimeter to monitor movement in and out of the area. The relief agencies often hoisted their flags to indicate to the Nigerian officers that they were in neutral zones that should be protected from assault. That did not always keep the Nigerian troops from raiding these safe havens, or even from bombing them. Life in the camps varied in quality. Some of the better organized camps provided water, shelter, food, basic health caremainly vaccinations for children against the most prevalent diseases, and treatment of common bacterial infectionsand education. Other camps could only be described as deplorable, epidemic-ridden graveyards. In these camps the combination of poor sanitation, high population density, and shortages of supplies created a bitter cocktail of despair, giving rise to social pathologies and psychological traumas of all kinds violence, extortion, and physical and sexual abuse.  My siblings and their families returned to my fathers house in Ogidi from various parts of the country. My family did too: Christie and my children at the time, Chinelo and Ike, left Port Harcourt for my familys ancestral home. My village is about six miles from Onitsha, the commercial hub of Eastern Nigeria and the location of the largest market in West Africa. Onitsha is also where the famous Niger Bridge is located, and so it serves as the entry point for all travelers entering the East from points west. The close proximity of Ogidi to Onitsha meant that we were in the eye of the storm, as it were, right at the border of the conflict. We were so close to the war zone we could hear the sounds of warheavy artillery fire, bombs, and machine-gun fights.2 By the time I left Lagos to join my family in Ogidi, there were rumors that the Nigerian army was not that far behind. Casting my mind back, I am surprised at how little pandemonium there was during the early stages of the conflict. Families casually began to move deeper into the countryside to prepare for the inevitability of war. Food was short, meat was very short, and drugs were short. Thousandsno, millions by thenhad been uprooted from their homes and brought into safer areas, but where they really had no relatives, no property; many of them lived in school buildings and camps. The Committee for Biafran Refugees, understandably overwhelmed, did what it could. I found it really quite amazing how much people were ready to give. Beyond the understandable trepidation associated with a looming war, one found a new spirit among the people, a spirit one did not know existed, a determination, in fact. The spirit was that of a people ready to put in their best and fight for their freedom. Biafran churches made links to the persecution of the early Christians, others on radio to the Inquisition and the persecution of the Jewish people. The prevalent mantra of the time was Ojukwu nye anyi egbe ka anyi nuo aghaOjukwu give us guns to fight a war. It was an energetic, infectious duty song, one sung to a well-known melody and used effectively to recruit young men into the Peoples Army (the army of the Republic of Biafra). But in the early stages of the war, when the Biafran army grew quite rapidly, sadly Ojukwu had no guns to give to those brave souls. But the most vital feeling Biafrans had at that time was that they were finally in a safe place . . . at home. This was the first and most important thing, and one could see this sense of exhilaration in the effort that the people were putting into the war. Young girls, for example, had taken over the job of controlling traffic. They were really doing it by themselvesno one asked them to. That this kind of spirit existed made us feel tremendously hopeful. Clearly something had happened to the psyche of an entire people to bring this about. Richard West, a British journalist, was so captivated by the meticulous nature with which Biafrans conducted the affairs of state that he wrote a widely cited article in which he lamented: Biafra is more than a human tragedy. Its defeat, I believe, would mark the end of African independence. Biafra was the first place I had been to in Africa where the Africans themselves were truly in charge.3  Soon after I arrived in Ogidi we were told that Nigerian soldiers, led by Murtala Muhammed, were trying to cross the Niger Bridge from Asaba into Onitsha, and were being kept at bay by the Biafran colonel Achuzia (aka Air Raid Achuzia). Shuwas troops were marching into Igbo land across the Benue River in the north at the same time. There was quite an overwhelming sense of anxiety in the air. We had all gone to bed on one particular nightmy family, Augustine and his family, and Frank and his family. We did not realize that Biafran soldiers had set up their armory outside my fathers house, on the veranda, the porch, and outside in the yard. The house was in a choice location, atop a small hill, and was clearly chosen by the army as a perfect site from which to shell the advancing Nigerian army and to surprise them with sniper fire. By this time in the war weat least some of ushad gotten used to sleeping with the sound of shelling and explosions, and occasional howls of pain and what some villagers called the stench of death. Others would recount that they did not sleep a wink through the war, an exaggeration of course, but a valid point nonetheless; sleeplessness was endemic. On this particular night we were oblivious to what was going on outside our fathers house. While we were sleeping the Biafran army was turning our ancestral home into a military base of sorts. No one asked us for permission. They did not knock to ask or to inform. In hindsight, what happened next was enough to have caused sudden cardiac arrest in some people. We all were awakened violently from sleep by a loud ka-boom!, followed by the rattling of the house foundation and walls, indeed of the entire house. A number of people who were asleep fell off their beds, violently ushered back into reality by the vibrations, the shock, and the noise of the artillery fire outside. It was awful. The men in the house went outside to find out what was going on. A colonel who was in charge of this exercise explained that they had decided to use our home as a tactical base because it provided them a logistical and strategic advantage as they shelled the encroaching federal troops. Surely it was time for us to leave. The Abagana Ambush On March 25, 1968, the Second Division of the Nigerian army finally broke through the Biafran resistance and entered Onitsha. (The federal troops had failed the first attempt to cross the Niger, suffering great casualties at the hands of Achuzias guerrilla army; this was the second attempt.) Their plan following this development was to link up these federal troops with the forces of the First Division, led by Colonel Shuwa, that were penetrating the Igbo heartland from the north. The amalgamation of these two forces, the Nigerian army hoped, would then serve as a formidable force that would smash the Biafrans.1 Colonel Murtala Muhammed hastily deployed a convoy of ninety-six vehicles and four armored cars to facilitate this plan on March 31, 1968. Biafran intelligence was swift to respond, and it informed Major Johnathan Uchendu, who formulated an elaborate plan. He arranged a seven-hundred-manstrong counterattack that essentially sealed off the Abagana Road. He commanded his troops to lie in ambush in the forest near Abagana, waiting patiently for the advancing Nigerians and their reinforcements. Major Uchendus strategy proved to be highly successful. His troops destroyed Muhammeds entire convoy within one and a half hours. All told the Nigerians suffered about five hundred casualties. There was minimal loss of life on the Biafran side. Very few federal soldiers survived this ambush, and those who did were found walking dazed and aimless in the bush. There were widespread reports of atrocities perpetrated by angry Igbo villagers who captured these wandering soldiers. One particularly harrowing report claimed that a mob of villagers cut their capture into pieces. I was an eyewitness to one such angry blood frenzy of retaliation after a particularly tall and lanky soldierclearly a mercenary from Chad or Maliwandered into an ambush of young men with machetes. His lifeless body was found mutilated on the roadside in a matter of seconds. Gifts of poisoned waterfilled calabashes were left in strategic places throughout the deserted villages to welcome the thirsty federal troops. My elder sisters family took refuge in Nnobi during all this commotion, the town where I was born. My father had settled there as a catechist and a teacher half a century earlier. The hosts of my sister and her family began to tell them that it was from my father that the people of that village learned to eat rice about fifty years before his children returned to this bucolic town as refugees. The host, a man of great consideration and taste, proclaimed that he was, therefore, going to cook rice for my sisters family to salute my father. There were attempts to humanize our existence despite the horrors that surrounded us all. Life went on as much as the people could manage it. Through it all, there was a great deal of humor. I remember one occasion after an air raidand these are really horrible thingssomebody saw two vultures flying very high up, and he said, That is a fighter and a bomber, and everybody burst into laughter. It was a very poor joke, I know, but laughter helped everyone there keep their sanity . . . that is, if you wanted to survive. I did not realize how I was being affected by living under those circumstances until I traveled out of Biafra on a mission to England. I heard planes taking off and landing at Heathrow Airport, and my first instinct was to duck under safe cover.2 AIR RAID It comes so quickly the bird of death from evil forests of Soviet technology A man crossing the road to greet a friend is much too slow. His friend cut in halves has other worries now than a friendly handshake at noon1 The Citadel Press News filtered in that life approached some semblance of normalcy far away from the immediate arenas of war. A few weeks after my arrival in Ogidi I was informed that there was a job opening in Enugu, so I packed up my family at my fathers house and headed farther east into Igbo land, and, we hoped, away from the war zone. Christopher Okigbo left his work at Cambridge University Press in Ibadan, where he served as Cambridges West Africa manager. He suddenly appeared in Enugu a few weeks after I arrived from Lagos. By the time we all arrived back in Eastern Nigeria, after escaping the massacres across the rest of the country, it became clear to me that it would be beneficial to the cause of Biafra if intellectuals worked together to support the war effort. Christopher came to me and requested that we establish a publishing house. It immediately seemed to me to be a very good idea, for we believed it was necessary at this time to publish books, especially childrens books, that would have relevance to our society. This was something we felt very strongly about. We felt we wanted to develop literature for children based on local thought, and we set up a firm called The Citadel Press. Biafra declared its independence while we were developing our plans, and we were more confident than ever that what we were doing was good for the cause. Christopher proceeded to get a plot of land in a key area of Enugu off one of the citys major thoroughfarestodays Michael Okpara Avenue. It was a very strategic piece of land at the commercial nerve center of the future capital of Biafra, Enugu. The building that was erected had a few rooms one for Christopher, one for me, one for our secretary, one area for printing and publishing machinery, and a smaller one was a toilet. Christopher made all the arrangements himself. That was his nature: He would get the work done before even broaching the subject, so that when you eventually agreed to his idea (something he was sure you would), he would then release a torrent of information, in this case about the office location, its design, and what the building would cost us. The first book we worked on was called How the Leopard Got Its Claws. John Iroaganachi, a talented author, submitted a manuscript of a version of the African myth How the Dog Became a Domesticated Animal, which Professor Ernest Emenyonu relates abounds in various versions in many African cultures.1 Christopher and I realized immediately that we wanted a different story, more or less, and decided to spend some time on it. Iroaganachis story transformed into something entirely different as I worked on it, and began to take and find avenues and openings in a way that the original narrative hadnt. Christopher in particular was put off by the subservient character of the dog in the original version and was delighted to see the next incarnation of the story. To be certain that everyone was on the same page, Christopher asked Iroaganachi if he was ready to see his original story transformed. Iroaganachi had no problem with the changes we had suggested, and we settled on a joint authorship for our first book, between me, John Iroaganachi, and Okigbo, who wrote a powerful poem, Lament of the Deer, on my invitation. Christopher was seen less often as the war intensified. I kept on working at the office, and he came back whenever he had some time, and we discussed a number of matters.2 The war clearly influenced the crafting of the new story. In the second version the leopard is the king of animals and is a peaceful and wise king. One day he is cast out by tyrants, led by the dog, into the cold, wet wilderness. The leopard seeks help from the blacksmith, who makes teeth and claws of steel for him, Thunder and Lightning, that grant him his roar and strength. Then he returns to his kingdom to retake his throne, punish the usurpers, and banish the dog to the services of man in perpetuity. In the end the new story not only turned the ancient African fable on its head but also clearly had manifestations of the Biafran story embedded in it. The Ifeajuna Manuscript Christopher and I encountered a wide variety of projects during our time at Citadel Press. Emmanuel Ifeajuna, one of the so-called five majors who executed the January 15, 1966, coup dtat, presented a manuscript to Christopher, and he excitedly brought it to me. I too was excited to receive it; I opened the package it came in and began to read it. It was the story of the military coup. I read the treatise through quickly and became more and more disappointed as I went along. Ifeajunas account showcased a writer trying to pass himself off as something that he wasnt. For one, the manuscript claimed that the entire coup dtat was his show, that he was the chief strategist, complete mastermind, and executer, not just one of several. He recognized the presence of his coconspirators but did not elevate their involvement to any level of importance. The other problem I noted was the inconsistencies in the narrative. For instance, the group of coup plotters are said to have met in a chalet at a catering guest house in Enugu at night, and because what they were doing was very dangerous, there was no light in the room, and they all sat in pitch darkness. Despite the darkness, Ifeajuna, our narrator, goes on to say: I stood up and addressed them while watching their faces and noting their reactions. The whole account was replete with exaggerations that did not ring true. I also struggled with the fact that the writer seemed not to appreciate the seriousness of what he had done. Ifeajunas manuscript passed off the assassination of the prime minister as light fare, as if it was all in good sport, almost as if he was saying to his readers I did this and I was right. I am a hero. When I saw Christopher Okigbo next I told him how impossible it was for me to believe this accountI wanted to get a real sense of what really happened on that fateful day in January 1966, not what Ifeajuna would want us to believe. Christopher, having read the manuscript as well said, I thought it was lyrical. He then told me that he bumped into Nzeogwu shortly after receiving the manuscript, and Nzeogwu said to him: I hear you and Achebe are planning to publish Emmas [Ifeajuna] lies. That comment from Nzeogwu further placed the manuscript in disrepute. My own private conclusion was that Ifeajunas manuscript was an important document, but it was not a responsible document. I believed Nzeogwu was right. But, unfortunately for all of us, the manuscript seems to have disappeared, which is not surprising considering what happened to all of the people involved in its story. Ifeajuna and Nzeogwu are both dead, robbing us all of the opportunity of reading two competing versions of what transpired. They are no longer here to help fill this void. This is what gives me my only regret: I could have published the manuscript and called it special publishing, as opposed to so-called regular or mainstream publishing, so that at least a version of what happened, however flawed, warts and all, would be available for debate. Staying Alive While I worked at the Citadel Press, Christie, with her characteristic ingenuity and flair for design, created a home for us in this new city. When we arrived in Enugu we quickly found accommodation on the outskirts of town. It was an apartment complex with two subunits. We took the flat upstairs and converted this empty space into a very livable, comfortable accommodation. She employed a number of workers, including painters, masons, carpenters, and electricians, over a short period of time in this miraculous feat of transformation. The other tenant of this building was a charming architect. He too went ahead, and architecturally altered the lower living quarters to meet his needs. We could leave to the eye of the beholder whether this pleasant artists taste was eccentric or eclectic. But one thing was clear: His new design did not go down well with the landlord. I put my family to bed one hot night toward the end of the renovation, and opened a window to let a gentle, cool breeze in. At about 2:00 A.M. Christie first heard the noise of an intruder. She alerted me, and I shouted at the top of my voice, Where is my gun? We saw the outline of a figure in the dark dash past us and jump through the open window. The intruder thankfully did not realize that I did not possess a gun and was adamantly against the use of firearms. The next day the workmen were one person short. When we asked where the missing man was we were told that he had gone to the hospital to nurse a broken leg.  I traveled abroad soon after the move to Enugu, on a mission for the people of Biafra. I asked my close friend Christopher Okigbo to take care of my family while I was away. Christie was pregnant, and I turned my young family over to Christopher for protection during this precarious time. In a quintessential Christopher Okigbo move, he promptly checked them into the catering guest house, a swank hotel chain of the day, first run smartly by the colonial British government and then quite well by the government of the first republic of Nigeria. This particular branch was now in the hands of the Biafrans and had, in the words of Christopher, clearly an unbiased judge, returned to its former glory. In any case, Christopher had connections with the manager and introduced my wife and family as one of his own. One day Christie asked Christopher to get her a number of things for lunch from a nearby restaurant and said that she would pay for it all. She had a very powerful craving for fried plantains, beans, and a delicacy called Isi Ewu. Okigbo agreed to do so but instead telephoned the manager of the catering guest house, telling him that Christie Achebe, who was pregnant, needed the food items urgently, and that the food should be delivered to his room, and he would then make sure it got to her. After waiting two to three hours, Christie called Christopher about the food. Okigbo did not respond on the telephone but showed up in their room with the explanation that he had inadvertently eaten it, thinking it was a special lunch made for him. They could not believe it. On hearing this, my three-year-old son, Ike, who had uncharacteristically, for someone his age, been waiting patiently for lunch, launched at Okigbo, tackling him to the ground and punching him with everything he had. Okigbo howled and feigned pain, and then made sure he got my family a hearty dinner to eat. I returned from my trip abroad to the news that my mother, who was quite frail, had suddenly become quite sick. Her able and diligent physician, Dr. Theophilus Mbanefo, had worked tirelessly to care for her, and now he thought it best for her entire family to come back briefly and pay their last respects. I was very close to my mother, and I sent Christie and my family ahead of me while I worked through my private pain and wrapped up some business at the Citadel Press. My family subsequently left with our driver, Gabriel, for Ogidi to join the rest of my family at Mothers bedside. Christopher and I were working in this office of ours that morning, the first day a military plane flew over Enugu. Our editorial chat was disturbed by the sudden drone of an enemy aircraft overhead, and the hectic and ineffectual small-arms fire that was supposed to scare it away, rather like a lot of flies worrying a bull. Not a very powerful bull, admittedly, at that point in the conflict. In fact, air raids were crude jokes that could almost be laughed off. People used to say that the safest thing was to go out into the open and keep an eye on the bomb as it was pushed out of the invading propeller aircraft. We heard the sounds of more bombs exploding in the distance, and Christopher, who already seemed familiar with planes and military hardware, shouted, Under the table! Most of the other Biafrans were going about their business as usual, unperturbed by this menace flying above their heads. As Christopher and I listened uneasily, an explosion went off in the distance somewhere, and the attack was soon over. We completed our discussion and departed. But that explosion that sounded so distant from the Citadel offices was to bring him back for a silent farewell on that eventful day.1 After the plane disappeared into the distance, Christopher said he had to leave, and I went to check on something that was already in the pressthe first booklet that we were publishing for children. As I sat there working that day I heard the sound of an aircraft above, followed by bedlam in the distance. I shrugged this particular katakata, or chaos, off as another bombing raid from the Nigerians and got on with my chores. I set out to visit a business colleague and decided to stop at the house for a minute before proceeding to my original destination. At the house I saw a huge crowd and realized that it was my apartment complex that had been bombed!2 I pushed my way through the assembly to the edge of a huge crater in the ground beside the building, about a hundred feet from my childrens swing set. Luckily Christie and the children had left in the nick of time. Had there been anyone in the house they would not have survived.3 Okigbo was standing among the crowd. I can still see him clearly in his white gown and cream trousers among the vast crowd milling around my bombed apartment, the first spectacle of its kind in the Biafran capital in the second month of the war. I doubt that we exchanged more than a sentence or two. There were scores of sympathizers pressing forward to commiserate with me or praise God that my life or that the lives of my wife and children had been spared. So I hardly caught more than a glimpse of him in that crowd, and then he was gone like a meteor, forever. That elusive impression is the one that lingers out of so many. As a matter of fact, he and I had talked for two solid hours that very morning. But in retrospect that earlier meeting seems to belong to another time.4 I set off after that brief encounter with Christopher, homeless, to see my mother. My entire family was present in Ogidi, huddled, with long faces, grieving. Women could be heard sobbing in the distance. Some, like my brother Augustine, had just come in from Yaba, Lagos. Others, like Frank, our eldest brother, had arrived from Port Harcourt, where he worked for the Post and Telecommunications Corporation (P&T). I was informed soon after I got there that Mother had asked to see us all. We trooped into her bedroom one at a time and got to spend some private time with her. Soon after that, she passed away. Our people report that her spirit called my family away from Enugu to save their lives. I will not challenge their ancient wisdom. Death of the Poet: Daddy, Dont Let Him Die! I was driving from Enugu to Ogidi one afternoon, where I lived following the bombing, with my car radio tuned to Lagos. Like all people caught in a modern war, we had soon become radio addicts. We wanted to hear the latest from the fronts; we wanted to hear what victories Nigeria was claiming next, not just from NBC Lagos, but even more ambitiously, from Radio Kaduna. This station, also known as Radio Nigeria, was notorious as the mouthpiece of the Nigerian federal government; it only reported Nigerian military victories and successes, and those of us caught in a conflict wanted to hear balanced, unbiased news. We needed to hear what the wider world had to say to all thatthe BBC, the Voice of America, the French Radio, Cameroon Radio, Radio Ghana, Radio Anywhere. The Biafran forces had just suffered a major setback in the northern sector of the war with the loss of the university town of Nsukka. They had suffered an even greater morale-shattering blow with the death of that daring and enigmatic hero who had risen from anonymity to legendary heights in the short space of eighteen months: Major Chukwuma Kaduna Nzeogwu. Christopher Okigbo had begun to talk more and more about Nzeogwu before his enlistment, but I had not listened very closely; the military did not fascinate me as it did him. In hindsight, I wish I had listenedlistened for all our sakes. I was only half listening to the radio now when suddenly Christopher Okigbos name stabbed my slack consciousness into panic life. Rebel troops wiped out by gallant Federal forces, the announcement proclaimed. Among the rebel officers killed: Major Christopher Okigbo.1 Its rather different when a soldier is killed in battlethey get the body. I dont know what happens, but if they can identify him, and if they think they can make capital out of it, they immediately announce it. The killing of officers is something of which they are very proud. Christopher was a major.2 I pulled up at the roadside. The open parkland around Nachi stretched away in all directions. Other cars came and passed. Had no one else heard the terrible news? When I finally got myself home and told my family, my three-year-old son, Ike, screamed: Daddy, dont let him die! Ike and Christopher had been special pals. When Christopher came to the house the boy would climb on his knees, seize hold of his fingers, and strive with all his power to break them while Christopher would moan in pretended agony. Children are wicked little devils, he would say to us over the little fellows head, and let out more cries of feigned pain.3 Christopher fell in August 1967, in Ekwegbe, close to Nsukka, where his poetry had come to sudden flower seven short years earlier. News of his death sent ripples of shock in all directions. Okigbos exit was totally in character. Given the man and the circumstance it was impossible for everyone to react to the terrible loss in the same way. The varied responses, I think, would have pleased Okigbo enormously, for he enjoyed getting to his destination through different routes.4  I remember visiting Okpara Avenue, the site of the Citadel Press, soon after the war, and I was appalled at the scale of destruction that had befallen that small building. It is important to mention that a number of buildings in the vicinity had been unscathed by the conflict, but this one was pummeled into the ground; chips of the concrete blocks scattered everywhere had been pulverized as if with a jackhammer. It was the work of someone or some people with an ax to grind. It appeared as if there was an angry mission sent to silence the Citadelfor having the audacity to publish How the Leopard Got Its Clawsa book that challenged the very essence of the Nigerian federations philosophy, depicting the return of the spurned former ruler to vanquish and retake his throne from the wretched and conniving usurper. Having had a few too many homes and offices bombed, I walked away from the site and from publishing forever. A few months later my friends Arthur Nwankwo and Samuel Ifejika decided to establish a publishing company that they called Nwamife Books. One of the new companys first publications was a compendium of stories that chronicled the harrowing war years. I submitted a contribution to that important anthology, and then took the opportunity to persuade them to publish How the Leopard Got Its Claws. They agreed. The talented Scandinavian Per Christiansen illustrated for the work, and effectively united the prose and poetry in a visual consonance. I was grateful to see the manuscript Christopher and I had worked so hard on back in print. MANGO SEEDLING Through glass windowpane Up a modern office block I saw, two floors below, on wide-jutting concrete canopy a mango seedling newly sprouted Purple, two-leafed, standing on its burst Black yolk. It waved brightly to sun and wind Between rainsdaily regaling itself On seed yams, prodigally. For how long? How long the happy waving From precipice of rainswept sarcophagus? How long the feast on remnant flour At pot bottom? Perhaps like the widow Of infinite faith it stood in wait For the holy man of the forest, shaggy-haired Powered for eternal replenishment. Or else it hoped for Old Tortoises miraculous feast On one ever recurring dot of cocoyam Set in a large bowl of green vegetables This day beyond fable, beyond faith? Then I saw it Poised in courageous impartiality Between the primordial quarrel of Earth And Sky striving bravely to sink roots Into objectivity, midair in stone. I thought the rain, prime mover To this enterprise, someday would rise in power And deliver its ward in delirious waterfall Toward earth below. But every rainy day Little playful floods assembled on the slab, Danced, parted round its feet, United again, and passed. It went from purple to sickly green Before it died. Today I see it still Dry, wire-thin in sun and dust of the dry months Headstone on tiny debris of passionate courage.1 Refugees Enugu fell to the Nigerian army a few months after Christopher fell in battle. I fled to Umuahia with my family to stay with my sister-in-law, Elizabeth Okoli, who had moved there from Aba. Lizzy was a nurse working in Umuahia-area hospitals tending to the war wounded. Her story is quite remarkable: Lizzy was educated at Queens College, Lagos, and in England, and was known in those days as the Queen of Sheba, because of her grace and beauty. She was well regarded for her clinical skills and her intellect and would become the chief nursing officer of Anambra state in a new incarnation following the civil war. Elizabeth was a bit of an enigma and an eccentric, and a former Mrs. Odumegwu Ojukwu to boot, but she never wanted to talk about that! My brother Augustine and his family were also in Umuahia. Shortly after our arrival, as I have mentioned, I was sent abroad as an envoy for the people of Biafra. Christie reports that Umuahia was subsequently strafed very close to where my family was staying. After the bombing that barely missed Lizzys residence, my family moved to Ezinifite, a town north of Umuahia in the Aguata local government area of present-day Anambra state. I returned from my short trip abroad and rejoined my family there. It was there that we visited a family who in the past had sent one of their sons to live with and be educated by my father. Now we were refugees, and this family who had received the magnanimity of my parents opened their homes and their resources to usthe three Achebe familiesAugustines, Johns, and mineand we moved into the quarters offered to us. It was a large estate. The head of the household lived in the largest of about four houses. The sons, who were also married, had homes built within the family compound. The sons gave each Achebe guest and their families a room and a parlor. Finding food in Ezinifite was a difficult proposition. The women had to wake up very early in the morningabout 4:00 A.M.to attend the daily markets to procure food. When the Nigerians found out where the open markets were and started bombing them, the women moved their commercial activities into dense forests. Christie remembers one of the early morning markets she went tothe villagers from the surrounding towns and hamlets would congregate in these markets to sell their fresh vegetables, fruit and chicken, and other household wares. If one had the moneyone could use the Nigerian pound and the Biafran pound interchangeablythere were a variety of expensive, locally grown legumes, pawpaw, mangoes, bananas, and plantains, and other vegetables and fruits to purchase. The traders coveted the Nigerian pound, because it was particularly valuable in the black market and for purchasing and smuggling goods and food across the border. The Nigerians bombed the market a day after Christie visited the market. She remembers vividly: The bombardment from the Nigerian Air Force on this day was particularly heavy, as if the pilots had been upset at not discovering the market sooner. Most of the bombs fell before dawn. In the morning we discovered the most harrowing of sights. One image still haunts me till today: that of a pregnant woman split in two by the Nigerian blitz. That was a horrendous experience for most of us, and we were all very frightened after that.1 The Nigerian air force intensified its bombing exercises soon after this incident. Word had reached the Biafran authorities that the Nigerians had classified information about the location of civilian hideout shelters. Our hosts were understandably concerned for our overall safety and built makeshift bunkers throughout their compound. The bunkers were built of mud-and-clay bricks and clearly were not structurally capable of withstanding a shelling, but we were grateful nonetheless, because they were large, comfortable spaces underground, away from the houses that would be obvious targets of the Nigerian air force. Whenever we heard the siren we all rushed to the bunkers for safety and waited out the air strikes. The Biafran government had issued a public safety warning to all citizens to abstain from wearing clothes of light colors like white or cream or sharp colors such as orange, purple, or red that could be easily spotted by the Nigerian air force. The Nigerian pilots approaching their chosen targets would often switch off the engines of the planes, then fly very lowtreetop levelbefore they would begin the bombing onslaught. One could see that the plane crew was pushing out these bombs with their hands, tossing them out from an open aircraft door or shaft! Occasionally when the Nigerians used their aircraft guns to shoot at civilian or military installations, we noticed that some of the bullet cases were from large hunting ammo usually reserved for wild game.2 On this particular day we did not hear the siren or the planes; no one knew that the Nigerians were in the air. When we noticed a plane zooming in for the kill we rushed into the bunkers and looked around to account for everyone, counting all the children. To our horror we realized that our third child, Chidi, was not there. We looked out and saw the toddler in his white diaper taking his time, walking from the gate of the compound toward one of the houses. People tried to prevent Christie from leaving the bunker to rescue the infant for fear that her heroism might reveal the site of the bunker. One said: Leave him, he is innocent, nothing will happen to him. Clearly unconvinced and ignoring their advice, Christie dashed out from the bunker, grabbed the baby, and arrived inside seemingly in time to avoid notice. During our stay we had a number of confrontations not just with the Nigerian army but with nature. As we ran from one zone of attack to another we often ended up seeking shelter in mud huts deep in the hinterland. One particular episode comes to mind: Christie had hung up a brown and black dress on a palm frond door that opened into the room shielded by a thatch roof in a mud building we were staying in. Exquisitely put together, these homes are ideal for the wet, damp weather of the tropics and provide cool solace from the often uncompromising elements. The one downside of this ancient architecture is the fact that mud buildings serve as an elaborate ecosystem of insects, arachnids, rodents, amphibians, and reptilesin other words, an entomologists and a zoologists dream! So on this day, as Christie put on her dress, she received a sting that produced excruciating pain. We rushed to her side and discovered that a centipede had engaged her skin in a tenacious battle. The villagers quickly relieved her of the vermin with a hot object warmed in a coal fire. Though we were reassured that this was not a species that was poisonous, we slept in our car that night. We would have other narrow escapes with scorpions, serpents, and blood-sucking larvae, and became very vigilant. My nephew, Uche Achebe, had left to join the army from our Ezinifite base around this time. Uche, a bright lad, later became a surgeon and was at one point the medical director of Nigerias National Orthopaedic Hospital in Enugu. In any case, things were not working out very well for him in the army during this period. Uche is a practical, rational person by temperament, and he noted that the Nigerian army was quickly approaching, and there were so many bombings that cost the lives of scores of Biafrans on a daily basis. He lamented the fact that the Biafrans were not well equipped and appeared to be in perpetual retreat. Compounding this desperate situation, he observed, was the fact that the Biafran people were becoming disenchanted. Unfortunately, Uche made his observations known to one of his fellow army officers, saying something to the effect of: If we are not able to do this, why dont we give up? He was subsequently reported and arrested for treason. In the end, after some intervention from several sources, he managed to escape courtmartial. Irony plays a wicked game with life. The Nigerian army took over Ezinifite very soon after the prophetic statements of my nephew, and we fled once again, this time to the beautiful lakeside town of Oguta. We had a fairly quiet spell in Oguta, because the Nigerians had been repulsed prior to our arrival. The locals credited this victory to Ohamiri, the goddess of Lake Oguta, who protected the Oguta people. From time to time, one could hear the artillery shelling as the federal government troops tried on multiple attempts to obliterate the Uli airport, which was near Oguta. The federal troops at that point had not discovered that there were two airportsUli was the earlier one, which was very close to Oguta and the nerve center of Biafran relief efforts. A second, smaller airport, less wellknown, was in Nnokwa and was also used for military missions. Nnokwa is a little-known ancient village that played a vital role in Igbo cosmology and in the development of its civilization. The townsfolk were particularly noted for their role in the transmission of the knowledge of Nsibidi, an ancient writing first invented by the Ejagham (Ekoi) people of southeastern Nigeria, and then adopted and used widely by their close neighborsthe Igbo, Efik, Anang, and Ibibio. The very existence of this alphabet, dating back to the 1700s without any Latin or Arabic antecedent, is a rebuke to all those who have claimed over the centuries that Africa has no history, no writing, and no civilization! But we always knew of the beauty of our culture, and one can understand why Nnokwa was a place to be protected by the Biafrans at all costs. In Oguta, we moved into my friend Ikenna Nzimiros uncles housea huge mansion. Some joked that it was as large as Buckingham Palace. One could see that the mansion was virtually empty, as those who lived there, including the staff, had all fled. The mother of the house, if you like, Nzimiros elderly auntie, stayed behind with one or two of her attendants; she seemed ill and did not appear very often. Nzimiros uncle had died several years before the conflict. With her blessing we were given luxurious quarters and had quite a comfortable stay. It was during our sojourn in Oguta that Christie started a school to keep the children of our hosts and the Achebe children engaged in their studies. Christie had books that she had bought from shops, and she used these to teach the children, with Chinelo, our first child and daughter. Each child started from the last class they were in before the war broke out, and then graduated after they completed the lesson plans. Despite the chaos and madness all around, some privileged children, at least, still went to school. From Oguta we would be driven out to the Shell compound, aka Shell Camp, in Owerri after the city had been recaptured by the Biafrans. In the colonial era Shell Camp was the residential quarters of some colonial officers and Shell senior officials, before Royal Dutch/Shell BP moved their permanent quarters to Port Harcourt in present-day Rivers state, in the Niger River Delta area. Shell Camp in those days was a fairly lovely part of town, a neatly manicured estate with well-maintained bungalows and lawns, telecommunications facilities, good roads, and a reliable water supply. Christie was expecting a baby and was ill during this time. She was moved to a Roman Catholic hospital of high repute in the region, admitted by the physician on staff, and cared for by the nursing sisters, a number of whom were from Europe. We heard during her hospital stay that the Nigerians had finally broken through the blockade mounted by the Biafran soldiers, rearmed, and launched a second offensive, pushing closer to Owerri. It clearly had become quite serious when we noticed Biafran soldiers coming into the hospital to warn the clinical staff to leave and evacuate all the patients. Christie was summarily discharged. When we returned to Shell Camp we saw that the area had been infiltrated by the Nigerian army, some wearing mufti, who watched us closely. We noticed that the entire estate was almost deserted. The main roads were jammed with civilians trying to escape before the Nigerian troops arrived. Some of the federal forces who had already entered Owerri would snicker at the civilians; some would wave cynically. It was eerie and frightening. We picked up the few belongings we had in the house and jumped back into the car. During the war years one never really unpacked; one always had the belongings in the trunk of the car and took only the absolute necessities into the temporary shelter that you found yourself in. We decided to get off the major thoroughfares, so we meandered through the rural areas, villages, and hamlets and arrived in the village of Okporo. This pleasant community holds a special place in Biafran lore, because it was the site of a special hospital for children run by Caritas, and it was one of the sites chosen to gather sick babies for the famous airlift of Biafran babies to Gabon and Ivory Coast organized by international relief agencies. I recall visiting a clinic that had been hastily set up by one of the many foreign nongovernmental organizations (NGO) during this time. They had chosen an abandoned secondary school complex and set up shop in what must have been the cafeteria. There were bullet holes in the limestone and concrete walls and pieces of glass shattered on the floor, suggesting a recent gun battle. The patients were strewn on the shiny red laterite floor on bamboo and raffia matsthe adults in one section and the children in the other. It was raining on that day, and the holes in the corrugated iron roofs provided a steady stream of water that dripped directly on some patients (who appeared not to care) and collected in puddles throughout the building. The visitor was greeted by the strong smell of vomit, diarrhea, and other bodily fluids that are kept private in sunnier times. In the distance one could hear the screams of pain from what appeared to be a makeshift operating room, where surgeons performed procedures with woefully limited anaesthesia. There was a child in a corner who was being fed a white mealthe relief meals were almost always white, I thoughtand it was a concoction that meant the difference between an early grave or another day to see the sun. On this day, at least, this reed-thin child, with a skull capped with wiry rust-colored tufts of hair and a body centered on a protuberant stomach, provided a toothy smile. I spent a short while smiling back at her, and she reached out to touch my hand. Her touch was as light as feathers. Dr. Aaron Ifekwunigwe, now a professor emeritus of pediatrics at the University of California, was the director of health services for Biafra at the time of the war. He performed extensive and important clinical research and treatment during this time. He studied the impact of starvation on the Biafran population. One of his most compelling research projects, in March 1968, found during this early period of starvation that 89 percent of those affected were children under five years of age. The remaining 11 percent were age five to fifteen.3, 4 [On] an early fact-finding mission in 1968, conducted by ICRC [International Committee of the Red Cross], Doctor Edwin Spirgi found that at least 300,000 children were suffering from kwashiorkor . . . and three million children were near death.5 There was another epidemic that was not talked about much, a silent scourge the explosion of mental illness: major depression, psychosis, schizophrenia, manic-depression, personality disorders, grief response, post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety disorders, etc.on a scale none of us had ever witnessed. One of the saddest images of the war was not just the dead and the physically wounded but also the mentally scarred, the so-called mad men and women who had been psychologically devastated by the anguish and myriad pressures of war. They could often be seen walking seemingly aimlessly on the roads in tattered clothes, in conversation with themselves. WE LAUGHED AT HIM We laughed at him our hungry-eyed fool-man with itching fingers that would see farther than all. We called him visionary missionary revolutionary and, you know, all the other naries that plague the peace, but nothing would deter him. With his own nails he cut his eyes, scraped the crust over them peeled off his priceless patina of rest and the dormant fury of his dammed pond broke into a cataract of blood tumbling down his face and chest. . . . We laughed at his screams the fool-man who would see what eyes are forbidden, the hungry-eyed man, the look-look man, the itching man bent to drag into daylight fearful signs hidden away from our safety at the creation of the world. He was always against blindness, you know, our quiet sober blindness, our lazyhe called itblindness. And for his pains? A turbulent, torrential cascading blindness behind a Congo river of blood. He sat backstage then behind his flaming red curtain and groaned in the pain his fingers unlocked, in the rainstorm of blows loosed on his head by the wild avenging demons he drummed free from the silence of their drum-house, his prize for big-eyed greed. We sought by laughter to drown his anguish until one day at height of noon his screams turned suddenly to hymns of ecstasy. We knew then his pain had risen to the brain and we took pity on him the poor fool-man as he held converse with himself. My Lord, we heard him say to the curtain of his blood, I come to touch the hem of your crimson robe! He went stark mad thereafter raving about new sights he claimed to see, poor fellow; sights you and I know are as impossible for this world to show as for a hen to urinateif one may borrow one of his many crazy vulgarisms he raved about trees topped with green and birds flyingyes actually flying through the airabout the Sun and the Moon and stars and about lizards crawling on all fours. . . . But nobody worries much about him today: he has paid his price and we dont even bother to laugh any more.1 The Media War The Nigeria-Biafra War was arguably the first fully televised conflict in history. It was the first time scenes and picturesblood, guts, severed limbsfrom the war front flooded into homes around the world through television sets, radios, newsprint, in real time. It probably gave television evening news its first chance to come into its own and invade without mercy the sanctity of peoples living rooms with horrifying scenes of children immiserated by modern war. One of the silver linings of the conflict (if one can even call it that) was the international medias presence throughout the war. The sheer amount of media attention on the conflict led to an outpouring of international public outrage at the wars brutality. There were also calls from various international agencies for action to address the humanitarian disaster overwhelming the children of Biafra.1 Said Baroness Asquith in the British House of Lords, [Thanks to the miracle of television we see history happening before our eyes. We see no Igbo propaganda; we see the facts.2 Following the blockade imposed by the Nigerian government, Biafra became synonymous with the tear-tugging imagery of starving babies with blown-out bellies, skulls with no subcutaneous fat harboring pale, sunken eyes in sockets that betrayed their suffering.3 Someone speaking in London in the House of Commons, or the House of Lords, would talk about history happening all around them, but for those of us on the ground in Biafra, where this tragedy continued to unfold, we used a different language . . . the language and memory of death and despair, suffering and bitterness. The agony was everywhere. The economic blockade put in place by Nigerias federal government resulted in shortages of every imaginable necessity, from food and clean water to blankets and medicines. The rations had gone from one meal a day to one meal every other dayto nothing at all. Widespread starvation and disease of every kind soon set in. The suffering of the children was the most heart wrenching. Narrow Escapes At another stop, in the town of Okporo, we met a very pleasant gentleman who took my entire family in. He offered Christie and me the only finished room in the mud house he was still building. The rest of the floors were yet to be plastered. He moved out his belongings from the finished room and moved our things into it. We argued with him, but he would not hear it, and insisted that we stay in his most comfortable room. We more or less settled in. One was not sure where the war was headed, so we decided to stay in Okporo for as long as our hosts would have us. There was a great deal of confusion about the status of the republic. This was at the tail end of the conflict. At that point in the hostilities, both sides were really exhausted. One noticed it in the shuffling gait of the soldiers, in the less than chipper drill-song choruses, in the number of stories of army desertions. The news about surrender was already in the air. Tragically, there were many false rumors that the war had ended. Some people who had survived the war lost their lives that week because they had heard that people were being asked to come back to Enugu, that everything was over and returning to normal. Some of them were killed by Nigerian troops on the way. The federal troops soon arrived in Okporo and broke our idyllic village existence. With their arrival came the horrendous stories of nurses and local women being raped and violated in unthinkable ways.1 One day the Nigerian soldiers came to the compound, and we hid our daughter, Chinelo, who was eight. I was in the kitchen making bread in the earth (laterite) oven that we had designed. I watched the soldiers from the kitchen window for a while as they pranced around the compound and demanded that its owner hand over a large black-and-white-spotted goat that was tied to the fence, in a corner near a building that served as the storage area. The animal was oblivious of the soldiers menacing presence and busy chewing cud, its jaw swaying from side to side in between nibbles of long strands of elephant grass.2 The goat had sentimental importance to the wife of the owner of the residence, we learned from her pleas. It had been a gift from her father, so she refused to hand over the animal to the soldiers. I talked to the soldiers for a while, overwhelmed by the strong smell of Kai Kai, a local gin, on their breath, and in Igbo persuaded the wife of our host to give the soldiers the animal or be willing to lose her life and ours in the process. A small crowd had gathered to watch this spectacle. The soldiers at this point were showing off, pointing their rifles in our faces. As they marched off they instructed the animals owner to take care of the goat for them in their absence, because they were still on duty. If the goat was not there when they came back, they warned, you will all be responsible. As soon as the soldiers left the wife of our host, in a state of panic, untied the goat from the fence with the intention of hiding it in a dry well nearby. I called out to her to leave the goat alone. Let them take it, I said, and leave you alone. Fortunately for everyone the soldiers never returned for the war plunder.  I had the privilege of having an official car that had been assigned to me by the government of Biafra, which came with a driver. The driver was one of those hyperreligious individuals who wore only white (a sign of purity, apparently) and preached endlessly to his company, condemning everyone and everything to the damnation that awaitest thee if you dont repent! He was a truly curious character but an excellent driver nonetheless. One morning, as we woke to the greeting of the cock crow in the distance, I walked out to the brisk damp dawn, stretched, and smiled as I glanced around the villages in Nigeria always had an organic, wholesome, earthy smell to them and then it struck me: I noticed that the government vehicle had disappeared. Someone in the yard confirmed that the government driver had packed the entire car in the wee hours of the morning and fled with our belongings. We had traveled up to that point in a two-car convoyI drove my own car, a Jaguar, and the official car was driven by the chauffeur. Luckily, we still had the Jaguar, and we decided to leave Okporo with our own driver, who we knew was much more trustworthy. We took the other drivers disappearance as some sort of omen, thanked our hosts for their wonderful hospitality, and departed in the early afternoon with the intention of traveling back to Ogidi, my ancestral home. We headed north toward Onitsha, six miles from Ogidi. It was getting quite dark by the time we got to the outskirts of Oba, a few miles from Otu-Onitsha. Refined petroleum was available but not always readily accessible, and petrol depots were obvious targets of the federal troops. The driver reported that we had an empty gas tank and we were desperately in need of filling up the tank if we were to make the rest of the trip without incident. Almost immediately we heard the vehicle wobble and then just stop. A deep darkness had enveloped us there was no moonlight, so it seemed even darkerand our circumstances made the darkness seem even more ominous. We knew that one never ventured into canteens or restaurants for fear of meeting ones death at the hands of drunken soldiers. We decided that we would spend the night in the car. In the middle of the night some young men started walking around the car circling menacingly. They had come out of a restaurant, where they had been drinking, staggering clumsily and laughing and speaking at the top of their voices. We were very frightened. The driver and I got out of the car and started pushing the vehicle, for quite some time, until we encountered some Biafran soldiers in a jeep. The captain recognized me and advised us not to travel any farther this particular night, and he got his men to help us push the car the rest of the way to a petrol depot, where we filled our gas tank, parked the car at the corner, and passed the night there. The next morning we set out very early, gradually, moving in occasional spurts and starts, since the fuel in the cars tank clearly was adulterated. Not for the last time, we were happy to be unscathed. VULTURES In the grayness and drizzle of one despondent dawn unstirred by harbingers of sunbreak a vulture perching high on broken bones of a dead tree nestled close to his mate his smooth bashed-in head, a pebble on a stem rooted in a dump of gross feathers, inclined affectionately to hers. Yesterday they picked the eyes of a swollen corpse in a water-logged trench and ate the things in its bowel. Full gorged they chose their roost keeping the hollowed remnant in easy range of cold telescopic eyes. . . . Strange indeed how love in other ways so particular will pick a corner in that charnel house tidy it and coil up there, perhaps even fall asleepher face turned to the wall! . . . Thus the Commandant at Belsen Camp going home for the day with fumes of human roast clinging rebelliously to his hairy nostrils will stop at the wayside sweetshop and pick up a chocolate for his tender offspring waiting at home for Daddys return . . . Praise bounteous providence if you will that grants even an ogre a tiny glowworm tenderness encapsulated in icy caverns of a cruel heart or else despair for in the very germ of that kindred love is lodged the perpetuity of evil.1 The Fight to the Finish By the rainy season of 1968, Gowons three-pronged attack had surrounded millions of civilians who were harbored in a narrow corridor around Umuahia. He was counting on a strategy of decisive force to which the Biafrans responded with a classic guerrilla war strategy out of Che Guevaras playbook. The Biafrans surprised the Nigerians with their perseverance. Overwhelmingly outgunned, Philip Effiongs army was able to withstand the attack by breaking conflict zones into classic smaller wars, where the few arms he had would prove more effective. This strategy required no front lines, a reliance on small unit operations and great individual discipline.1 The Economic Blockade and Starvation The Biafrans paid a great humanitarian price by ceding a great deal of territory to the Nigerians and employing this war strategy. The famine worsened as the war raged, as the traditional Igbo society of farmers could not plant their crops. Gowon had succeeded in cutting Biafra off from the sea, robbing its inhabitants of shipping ports to receive military and humanitarian supplies. The afflictions marasmus and kwashiorkor began to spread farther, with the absence of protein in the diet, and they were compouded by outbreaks of other disease epidemics and diarrhea. The landscape was filled by an increasing number of those avian prognosticators of death as the famine worsened and the death toll mounted: udene, the vultures. By the beginning of the dry season of 1968, Biafran civilians and soldiers alike were starving. Bodies lay rotting under the hot sun by the roadside, and the flapping wings of scavengers could be seen circling, waiting, watching patiently nearby. Some estimates are that over a thousand Biafrans a day were perishing by this time, and at the height of Gowons economic blockade and starve them into submission policy, upward of fifty thousand Biafran civilians, most of them babies, children, and women, were dying every single month. Ojukwu seized upon this humanitarian emergency and channeled the Biafran propaganda machinery to broadcast and showcase the suffering to the world. In one speech he accused Gowon of a calculated war of destruction and genocide.1 Known in some circles as the Biafran babies speech, it was hugely effective and touched the hearts of many around the world. This move was brilliant in a couple of respects. First, it deflected from himself or his war cabinet any sentiments of culpability and outrage that might have been welling up in the hearts and minds of Biafrans, and second, it was yet another opportunity to cast his arch nemesis, Gowon, in a negative light.2 Ojukwu dispatched several of his ambassadors to world capitals, hoping to build on the momentum from his broadcast. His envoys received little new support or pledges. Frustrated by the obstacles he found in coaxing a more proBiafra policy from the United States, Sir Louis Mbanefo famously rebuked the Americans, saying: We are especially resentful of the ambivalent pretenses the United States makes, that it is trying to help us. . . . If we are condemned to die, all right, we will die. But at least let the world, and the United States, be honest about it.3 Meanwhile, on the other side of the planet, Nigerian and Biafran envoys were meeting with His Imperial Majesty Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia to sort out the modality of air and land transport for relief supplies to Biafra.4 The diplomatic battles had reached a fever pitch by the middle of 1968. Gowon, under immense international pressure and bristling from the whirlwind of publicity about Biafra, decided to open up land routes for a supervised transport of relief. To the consternation of Gowon, Ojukwu opted out of land routes in favor of increased airlifts of food from So Tom by international relief agencies. Ojukwu, like many Biafrans, was concerned about the prospect that the Nigerians would poison the food supplies.5 The Silence of the United Nations Biafrans had their own reasons to lament the death of the widely respected secretary general of the United Nations, Dag Hammarskjld, who was killed in an air crash in September 1961. The Burmese diplomat U Thant, selected to replace him, would lead the UN from 1961 to 1971. Unlike Dag Hammarskjld, who was an expert at conflict resolution, and a humanist, U Thant was a decidedly different kind of man.1 A noninterventionist who deferred to local bodies such as the Organization of African Unity for policy advice and guidance, U Thant provided the OAU a great deal of latitude in decision making and implementation. An argument could be made for this stance, at least at the beginning of the conflict, but as the humanitarian catastrophe worsened, leading ultimately to the starvation and death of millions, even the most committed anarchist would have expected greater United Nations involvement. That did not happen, and I and several others believe that had the United Nations been more involved, there would not have been as many atrocities, as much starvation, as much death. In October 1969, when Ojukwu reached out desperately to the United Nations to mediate a cease-fire as a prelude to peace negotiations,2 his pleas were met with a deafening silence. U Thant turned to the Nigerians for direction. Gowon insisted on Biafras surrender, and he observed that rebel leaders had made it clear that this is a fight to the finish and that no concession will ever satisfy them.3 This was a calculated strategy from the Nigerians, who now had the international cloak of the United Nations under which to commit a series of human rights violations. Failing to end the protracted Biafran guerrilla offensive, the Nigerian army openly attacked civilians in an ill-advised, cruel, and desperate attempt to incite internal opposition to the war and build momentum toward a quick surrender.4 The vacuum in moral and humanitarian leadership from the United Nations meant that the Nigerian federal government could operate with reckless abandon, without appropriate monitoring from international agencies. There would be precious little proof of the wartime atrocities had it not been for private nongovernmental agencies and individuals. In February 1969 alone nearly eight hundred civilians were massacred by targeted Nigerian air force strikes on open markets near OwerriUmuohiagu and Ozu-abam. The Nigerian air force pilots were particularly noteworthy for not respecting Geneva Convention resolutions describing civilian safe havens, such as hospitals, refugee and food distribution camps, and centers of religious worship. In an article called Who Cares About Biafra Anyway? that was published in the Harvard Crimson, Jeffrey D. Blum described the horrors witnessed by Harvard University School of Public Health professor Jean Mayer: Distribution centers and refugee camps are bombed and strafed if any large numbers of people are visible in the daylight. Red Cross insignias are singled out for special attention by Nigerian bombers. Mayer saw one European engaged in working on the Biafran side of the war front carrying 117 dying children in his truck to a hospital in a single night.5 These air strikes backfired for Nigeria, further eroding international support for their war effort. Ojukwu seized on this opportunity, releasing a statement to the international press following an address to the consultative assembly in Umuahia. He lambasted the federal troops for having begun a last desperate effort in the form of a land army pogrom. Ojukwu categorically denied any attempts by the Biafrans to surrender and reported that there would be an increased emphasis on the cultivation of staple crops to meet the mounting food needs of the starving Biafrans. Many of us wondered where and how exactly this cultivation would take place, given the fact that the land mass controlled by Biafra was at this point of the conflict a fraction of its original size. Ojukwu clearly intended to try to feed the starving masses. It was important to him for Biafrans to see him making an effort even if he failed at achieving his lofty goals. Many listening on the Biafran side were willing to receive this food for thought even if there was no food for their stomachs. Ojukwu also warned the government of Harold Wilson of Great Britain that the British will forfeit all holdings in Eastern Nigeria if it continued to provide military and logistical aid to the Nigerians.6 Wilsons government was feeling the heat of the glaring lights of international media scrutiny. On one of my trips to London, on August, 12, 1968, I was an eyewitness to one of the debates on the Biafran issue in the House of Commons, and I came away with this impression: If government was largely unmoved by the tragedy, ordinary people were outraged. I witnessed from the visitors gallery what was described as unprecedented rowdiness during a private members motion on Biafra. Harold Wilson, villain of the peace, sat cool as a cucumber, leaving his foreign secretary, Michael Stewart, to sweat it out. It was hardly surprising that many remarkable people would want to visit the scene of such human tragedy.7 Harold Wilson was concerned that the growing opposition to his Nigeria policy might cause him to lose the next general election. He tried to assuage domestic and international opinion by planning an elaborate trip to Nigeria. Baroness Castle famously and aptly described Lord Wilson as indulging in his near fatal weakness for gestures as a substitute for action.8 By the time Harold Wilson arrived at the theater that he had set on fire on March, 29, 1969, he chose to do so in an 11,000 tonne amphibious assault ship called Fearless with an extra platoon of marines aboard.9 Claiming to have arrived to negotiate a peace between the warring parties, Lord Wilson met only with Gowon, extending a Trojan invitation to Ojukwuto meet outside Nigeria, on Nigerian ground, or on the British ship Fearless anchored in the Lagos Lagoon. As a meeting in Biafra was not one of the choices, all the options were unsatisfactory to the Biafrans, who turned down the purely political invitation.10 Like the cruel deception of locusts that appear from a distance as a welcome visit of dark clouds gorged with rain, Lord Wilson failed to deliver on any resolution to help end the Nigeria-Biafra conflict and left the land stripped bare of what many felt was the last substantive hope of peace. Azikiwe Withdraws Support for Biafra Beyond the military histrionics, there were a number of important attempts at peace made by several local and international statesmen, including Nnamdi Azikiwe, Nigerias first president, who called on the United Nations to help end the conflict in Nigeria. In a speech at Oxford University on February 16, 1969, the former president and a one-time emissary of Biafra outlined a fourteen-point peace plan to be implemented by a proposed UN peace keeping force made up of international and local peace keeping forces that would stay on the ground for at least a year during the implementation of both a cease-fire and peaceful resolution of ethnic, economic, and political tensions. Azikiwes proposals also called on Nigeria and Biafra to sign a modus vivendi to be enforced by the Security Council of the United Nations.1 Azikiwes lecture could not have come at a more critical time. I remember many of us in Biafra were hoping that his intervention would bring about a breakthrough in the stalemate. That hope was crushed when, following his triumphant lecture at Oxford, his strategy, which was submitted to both United Nations officials and the federal government of Nigeria, was soundly rejected as unworkable. It is instructive to note that many of Azikiwes strategies and suggestions international conflict resolution with United Nations peacekeeping forces, the use of international observer teams and military personnel to complement existing resources on the ground, etc.have become standard United Nations practices today. Nevertheless, exactly six months later Nnamdi Azikiwe decided to discontinue any public support for the secessionist aspirations of Biafra and turned in his diplomatic credentials. There has been a great deal of speculation as to why Azikiwe withdrew his support for Biafra. He was in a tough position and made a very difficult decision after his counsel went mostly ignored by Ojukwu. The late Dr. Okechukwu Ikejiani provides for posterity a rare insight into Azikiwes thinking, apprehension, and intellectual struggle: His [Azikiwes] feeling was that when a leader of a nation wants to go to war, he should consult people. Primarily Ojukwu should have consulted Zik. Secondly, he should have consulted [Michael] Okpara [premier of eastern Nigeria]. Thirdly, he should have consulted other leaders. The only people that Ojukwu consulted were [Louis] Mbanefo and [Francis] Ibiam. I have Ibiams letter here. It was a great mistake. I told Ojukwu [to] invite these people [and inform them]. He told me they would compromise. Thats what he said. He didnt invite them, never asked them questions. Thats not how to lead. Thats what led us into trouble. There are many areas we would have compromised. Ojukwu did not compromise. Thats one of the mistakes we made in the war. . . . It wasnt that Zik opposed the war. Anybody with an intellect, with a sense would consider carefully the implications of a war. War is destructive. Theres no country that went to war that didnt suffer, not one. When we went to war, we destroyed everything we had. Thats true.2 One must also remember that Azikiwe had spent his entire life first fighting for Nigerian independence under the One Nigeria mantra. In a curious twist of irony he found the same position manipulated by the British he had helped oust from his homeland. To add insult to injury, Azikiwe watched helplessly as the words he helped invent were then used by the Nigerian armymade up of some of the very same people who from the get-go had rejected the concept of a unified Northern and Southern Nigeria. Azikiwe supporters allege that the refusal by Ojukwu to consider many peaceful strategies to end the conflict, coupled with the prospects of annihilation of his people, was, I was told, just too much for the great Zik of Africa to bear. The Recapture of Owerri The psychologically devastated Biafrans were wrestling with two dire prospects in the latter part of the Harmattan Season of 1969: mass starvation or death by organized ethnic cleansing at the hands of Gowons military. A third possibility, surrender, was not in the cards. By this time there were close to one hundred thousand men, women, and children, mainly children, perishing every six weeks. The Biafrans would get an emotional reprieve at the news of the recapture of Owerri, one of Biafras largest cities, from the Nigerian troops.1 Gowon was furious to learn that Owerri had fallen back into the hands of the army he had sworn to defeat in three months. He instituted a major reorganization of his armys leadership. The Nigerian Third Battalion was now to be commanded by Olusegun Obasanjo, the Second Division switched commanders from Haruna to Lieutenant Colonel Gibson Sanda Jalo, and the First Battalion was now led by Brigadier Iliya Bisalla, in place of Shuwa. The next several weeks saw an energized Biafran army engage the federal troops with heightened vigor. They were able to keep the Nigerian army at bay on several frontsacross the Imo River; through Uzuakoli to the seat of power in Umuahia and around the perimeter of Owerri, Nekede; and on the road to Aba. Colonel Joseph Achuzia, who had been placed in charge of the Biafran offensive by Ojukwu, even contemplated a major military push to Port Harcourt. The lack of ammunition or military supplies made this lofty goal a suicide mission, and even the radical Joseph Air Raid Achuzia knew his limitations.2 Achuzia was one of the most complicated, some say eccentric characters of the war. He was well-known throughout the East as a no-nonsense, disciplined, tactical and strategic military genius, and was highly respected, if not feared by the Nigerian federal forces for his mastery of guerrilla warfare and for giving them a run for their money on the battlefield. Military experts report that Achuzia remained Ojukwus ace commander throughout the conflict, and he was often called upon to solve problems or build upon military theater advantages. His detractors, who refer to him as a war zealot, provide the counterpoint that no action on the battlefield should be elevated to the level of genius, and that Achuzias desire for military discipline often, allegedly, meant shooting a number of Biafran soldiers in order to get the others to fall in line.3 Achuzia survived the conflict and was appointed the secretary general of the influential pan-Igbo group Ohaneze NdiIgbo in later years. Biafra Takes an Oil Rig: The Kwale Incident In the middle of the rainy season of 1969, Biafran military intelligence allegedly obtained information that foreign oilmen, particularly staff from the Italian governments oil conglomerate, Eni,1 were aiding the Nigerian army. The foreign workers were allegedly providing sensitive military information to the federal forcesabout Biafran troop positions, strategic military maneuvers, and training. This information was quickly made available to the Biafran command, which swiftly sent soldiers on a stealth dawn operation during which they invaded Enis combine in Kwale, in the Niger River Deltas oil reserve known as Okpai oil field. By the end of the exercise eleven workers had been killedten of the dead were Italian and one was from Jordan. The Biafrans took eighteen Eni employees hostage. Fourteen were Italian, three were German, and one was Lebanese. What happened next would stir international outrage of epic proportions and threaten the fragile emotional and moral support that the Biafrans had developed during the course of the war. The men were quickly detained on Biafran soil, tried, and found guilty of supporting the enemythe federal troops of Nigeriato wage a war of genocide. Predictably, there was a spontaneous outcry and appeals for clemency from disparate groups and countries. The Vatican and the embassies of Italy, Germany, Portugal, and Biafras African supportersIvory Coast and Gabon were at the vanguard of those asking for the release of the prisoners.2 Biafras local and international supporters were dismayed. One observer commented at the time: This indeed was not what the cause was about. . . . [W]e were engaged in a fight for self-determination. . . . [T]his was an unnecessary and costly distraction.3 Biafran officials were adamant, even obstinate; the enclaves minister for information, Ifegwu Eke, had this to say about the incident: Oilmen are more dangerous than mercenaries. . . . These are the people responsible for our suffering. Ojukwus own radio pronouncements about the incident were equally irascible: Oscillating amid impassioned outrage and constrained eloquence, the Biafran leader exclaimed: For 18 white men, Europe is aroused. What have they said about our millions? Eighteen white men assisting in the crime of genocide. What do they say about our murdered innocents? How many black dead make one missing white? Mathematicians, please answer me. Is it infinity?4 After Ojukwu received a private letter from the pope in June 1969, personally pleading for the release of the oilmen, many in Ojukwus inner circle were concerned about an international backlash. If the situation was not resolved swiftly, they feared, it could precipitate an instant sinking of Biafras international reputation and a permanent loss of Vatican, Italian, indeed international humanitarian support. Eventually, in late June 1969, the eighteen detained men were released and flown out of Biafra in the custody of diplomats from the Ivory Coast and Gabon. Some scholars believe that Ojukwus calculation was that a combination of Biafran military resistance and the disruption of oil operations in the region would reduce oil revenue flowing to Nigerias supporters and into the Nigerian treasury, crippling their war machinery and bringing about an accelerated negotiation to end the war.5 Others are less charitable and feel that the whole affair was a blunder for the record books; they ascribe Ojukwus decision to free the men as informed as much by the popes letter as by the prospect of Italian armed intervention to free their citizens6and his own rapid tumble from power in such a scenario. Be that as it may, the fact that seemed to have completely escaped the Biafran leaders was this: As a people proclaiming victimization at the hands of Nigeria, and rightfully so, we could not be seen as victimizers in any situation or setting, in order to continue receiving the widespread moral and humanitarian support we needed to survive. This failure to recognize this fundamental principle, I believe, contributed immensely to the downturn in Biafras fortunes. I personally believe that this fiasco was the clearest evidence of the mental fatigue of the Biafran military leadership.  The summer of 1969 would prove a busy one on the diplomatic front. Pope Paul VI, buoyed by the success of his emissaries in diffusing the Kwale incident, focused his energies next on procuring a lasting peace between the warring parties. During an official trip to Uganda the pontiff met the Biafran and Nigerian emissaries separately in lengthy talks, during which he expressed his desire that a peaceful resolution be found.7 The pontiff addressed the Ugandan Parliament on August 10, following an exhausting ceremony during which he consecrated twelve new African bishops, and repeated the Vaticans desire to mediate a lasting peace between Nigeria and Biafra: [I]n a region of Africa dear to us . . . there still rages an agonizing conflict. . . . We have not only sought to secure goods and medical assistance, impartially and by every means available, but have also tried to apply the remedy of a certain initial reconciliation. Up to now we have not succeeded and this gives us heartfelt pain. But we are resolved to continue our modest but affectionate and fair efforts of persuasion to help heal this fatal dissension.8 In America, the Nixon administration increased diplomatic pressure on the Gowon administration to open up avenues for international relief agencies at about the same time, following months of impasse over the logistics of supply routes. Many congressmembers, government officials, indeed lay citizens were increasingly exasperated by the endless streaming television imagery of dying Biafran babies, and by the blockade imposed by the Gowon government. Biafra had in Senator Edward M. Kennedy a humane and sympathetic ear. Kennedy called for early and sustained U.S. humanitarian intervention throughout the bloody conflict.9 Strom Thurmond, a senator from South Carolina, also became particularly vocal about Americas intention to continue providing relief supplies to the needy irrespective of the Nigerian federal governments obstinate blockade measures.10 Thurmond, an unlikely supporter of the breakaway Republic of Biafra, was a former Dixiecrat11a member of the conservative base of the old Democratic party of the 1950s and early 1960s that fled to the safety of the Republican Party following the reverberations of the civil rights period. He also had a not too flattering reputation for commandeering the filibuster of the Civil Rights Act of 1957. He was, however, a well-respected and high-profile congressman and a particularly effective legislatorall the characteristics that the desperate Biafrans needed.12 Biafran diplomats began to see some of the repercussions of the Kwale incident by the end of 1969, and the erosion of the goodwill that had been built up so successfully over the previous twenty-seven months. Neutral countries like Canada, hitherto officially silent, more or less, while engaged in spirited humanitarian support of the suffering, openly criticized the Ojukwu administration as one that was more interested in getting arms than food or medical supplies and had made up reasons for rejecting [humanitarian aid].13 For the Biafrans, particularly those of us who had made trips to Canada to secure their humanitarian support, this rhetoric was particularly devastating. 1970 and The Fall In Biafra, the Harmattan Season leading into 1970 was particularly harsh. I remember vividly the suffering of the people; everything seemed particularly bleak. The dry, sandy air seemed to be an additional torment, delighting in covering the body with layers of the Sahara Deserts fine dust, blown in from hundreds of miles away. This made it impossible for bare, weeping, vulnerable skin lesions to heal. It was particularly hard on the children. Looking around one could see a proud, devastated people. The Nigerians at this point were also worried about the physical and psychological impact that this war was having on their troops. The federal government, it was well-known, increased the recruitment of a great number of mercenaries from the neighboring countries of Chad and Niger, and from far away Mali, to supplement their numbers. The federal ranks were also plagued by widespread dissatisfaction with the war effort, the escalating number of casualties, and the lack of a clear vision for ending the conflict. To make matters worse for Gowon, the general population had grown impatient with what now appeared to be an endless conflict that had entered its thirtieth month. Gowon was clearly in a bind. He responded to this predicament by sending off secret memos to relay the details of his final offensive, a scorched-earth policy to crush the Biafran resistance once and for all. By the middle of January 1970, the Nigerian troops had regained the upper hand decisively. Biafra, for all terms and purposes was crushed emotionally, psychologically, financially, and militarily, and it came crashing down soon after the new year began. After failing many times over the thirty-month period, Gowon finally had Biafra surrounded on three fronts. In mid-January 1970, after Owerri had been recaptured by the federal troops and Uli airport was under heavy air and land assault by federal troops led by Olusegun Obasanjo, I knew the end for Biafra was near. That feeling was confirmed for millions of others in Biafra when Ojukwu went on the radio and announced that he was leaving the Peoples Republic of Biafra to explore alternative options for peace. We all learned later that he had traveled to Ivory Coast, one of Biafras early African supporters, where his longtime friend president Flix Houphout-Boigny, with French backing, had offered him asylum. Nigeria mounted attempts to repatriate Ojukwu for at least five years following the war in order to try him for war crimes, but they failed mainly because the French made access to him impossible. After that announcement there was sheer pandemonium throughout Biafra. Millions of Biafrans could be seen scrambling to get away from the Nigerian military forces, which at this point seemed to be advancing from every direction. Many of the classic Time and Life photos of this era were taken during this time of great panic, despair, and anxiety. There have been several debates over the decades since about why Ojukwu, the resistance leader of a people so wronged, left (some say fled) Biafra at this critical juncture, declaring in his classic style: Whilst I live, Biafra lives.1 His detractors, many of whom are still alive, still believe that this particular act was one of great cowardice, and that true heroes go down with the cause. I think Ojukwus departure, like many things that he did before, during, and after the war, was a complicated matter. It was clear to the Biafran leader that the end was near, that his troops had been defeated, at least militarily, and that the mostly Igbo Easterners on whose behalf he had waged this war were broken in every respect and were standing at the precipice of annihilation. By taking himself out of the equation, so to speak, Ojukwu robbed his old nemesis Gowon of the war booty he sought the mosthis head. Therefore, the protracted internal rivalry between the two men that I have referred to had no resolution, and he had robbed Gowon of closure and complete satisfaction in victory. Indeed, many psychologists believe that Gowon may not have been as conciliatory as he ended up being had Ojukwu stayed behind. Gowon does not stray far from my conclusions on this subject: What you should remember about the timeand, at least, give us some credit for it is that we did not take what would be considered normal action under such circumstances. In such an instance, all the senior officials involvedpoliticians as well as in the militarywould have been strung up for their part in the war. This is what happened at the end of the Second World War in Germany; it happened in Japan at the end of the campaign in that part of the world. This is the civilized worlds way of doing things. But we did not do even that. We did set up committees to look into cases such as where rebel officers had been members of the Nigerian Armed Forces, and their loyalty was supposed to be to the Federal Government. When the war ended, we reabsorbed practically everyone who was in the Army. But there were officers at a certain senior level [who] we insisted had to accept responsibility for their role in the secession. It was the only thing to do. Probably I could have given pardon; however, I was not the one who gave pardon to Ojukwu. . . . [I]n the case of Ojukwu, he had committed treason against the country! No matter how you see it, as far as the Nigerian context was concerned, he was the guilty party. In other areas, he would have been eliminated, and I thank God that He never put him in my hands. Otherwise I would have found it very difficult to save his life, even though I would try my best to save his life, because he was an old colleague, an old friend. But the public pressure would have made it impossible. So that was what happened in the case of people like Effiong. A few of the senior ones [who] were directly involved, we felt they should go. I think Effiong was dismissed. All that happened to the others was that they lost the few years of seniority gained during the period of the civil war.2 In Ojukwus absence, Sir Louis Mbanefo, the chief justice, and General Philip Effiong, the defeated republics leading military officer, met with a small group of Biafran government officials and made the fateful decision to surrender to the federal government of Nigeria. Effiong went on Biafran radio to announce the capitulation, and he spoke to the fear-stricken populace, urging calm and encouraging the troops to lay down their weapons. He announced that he was currently negotiating an armistice with the federal government of Nigeria, and that General Ojukwu had left the nation. This drew a very clear line between what was going on in the country and what was about to happenwhich was the fall of Biafra. Before that the defeat was already quite apparent. There were a few people who refused to recognize it and planned to continue to fight. I did not feel that continuing the conflict was an option at all. I felt that the best way to deal with this tremendous disaster was to not prolong the agony but to bring it to a close.  In the end, Biafra collapsed. We simply had to turn around and find a way to keep those people still there alive. It was a desperate situation, with so many children in need, kwashiorkor rampant, and thousands perishing every week. The notoriously incompetent Nigerian government was not responding to those in need quickly enough. With ill-advised bravado Gowon was busy banning relief agencies that had helped Biafra.3 It was in this environment of desperation that some people said, Lets go into the forest and continue the struggle. That would have been suicidal, and I dont think anybody should commit suicide. We had spent nearly three years fighting, fighting for a cause, fighting to the finish . . . for freedom. But all that had collapsed, and Biafra with it. A very bitter experience had led to it in the first place. And the big powers prolonged it. You see we, the little people of the world, are ever expendable. The big powers can play their games even if millions perish in the process. And perish they did. In the end millions (some state upward of three million, mostly children) had died, mainly from starvation due to the federal government of Nigerias blockade policies.4 General Gowon made a national broadcast on the eve of the official surrender to announce the end of the thirty-month war that he said had claimed over one hundred thousand military service men and women and over three million Biafrans. His no victor, no vanquished speech5 as it has come to be known, strove to strike a conciliatory tone, calling for the full reintegration of Igbos into the fabric of Nigerian life. There was great celebration throughout Nigeria and Biafra at the news of the end of the hostilities. A day later, on January 15, 1970, the Biafran delegation, which was led by Major General Philip Effiong and included Sir Louis Mbanefo, M. T. Mbu, Colonel David Ogunewe, and other Biafran military officers, formally surrendered at Dodan Barracks to the troops of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. Among the Nigerian delegation were: General Yakubu Gowon; the deputy chairman of the Supreme Military Council, Obafemi Awolowo; leaders of the various branches of the armed forces, including Brigadier Hassan Katsina, chief of staff; H. E. A. Ejueyitchie, the secretary to the federal military government; Anthony Enahoro, the commissioner for information; Taslim Elias, the attorney general; and the twelve military governors of the federation. At the end of the thirty-month war Biafra was a vast smoldering rubble. The head count at the end of the war was perhaps three million dead, which was approximately 20 percent of the entire population. This high proportion was mostly children. The cost in human lives made it one of the bloodiest civil wars in human history.6 The sequelae of wars often begin with an armistice. The suffering and humanitarian disaster left in the wake of wars destruction goes on long after the weapons are silencedfor months and years. Entire towns and villages, schools and farms in Biafra were destroyed. Roads and the rural areas were littered with landmines that continued to maim and kill unsuspecting pedestrians well after the hostilities ended. Many people had lost all that they owned. Loved ones in the thousands were reported missing by families. There were stories of scores of suicides. This was not just a case of Ani, or the land and its protector, the land goddess, bleeding, as my people would describe catastrophic events of this nature. It was worse: a case of Ani nearly exsanguinating to death. My generation had great expectations for our young nation. After the war everything we had known before about Nigeria, all the optimism, had to be rethought. The worst had happened, and we were now forced into reorganizing our thinking, expectations, and hopes. We (the former Biafrans) had to carry on in spite of the great disaster that was military defeat and learn very quickly to live with such a loss. We would have to adjust to the realities and consequences of a Nigeria that did not appeal to us any longer. Nigeria had not succeeded in crushing the spirit of the Igbo people, but it had left us indigent, stripped bare, and stranded in the wilderness. The Question of Genocide I will begin by stating that I am not a sociologist, a political scientist, a human rights lawyer, or a government official. My aim is not to provide all the answers but to raise questions, and perhaps to cause a few headaches in the process. Almost thirty years before Rwanda, before Darfur, over two million people mothers, children, babies, civilianslost their lives as a result of the blatently callous and unnecessary policies enacted by the leaders of the federal government of Nigeria.1 As a writer I believe that it is fundamentally important, indeed essential to our humanity, to ask the hard questions, in order to better understand ourselves and our neighbors. Where there is justification for further investigation, then I believe justice should be served. In the case of the Nigeria-Biafra War there is precious little relevant literature that helps answer these questions: Did the federal government of Nigeria engage in the genocide of its Igbo citizens through their punitive policies, the most notorious being starvation as a legitimate weapon of war? Is the information blockade around the war a case of calculated historical suppression? Why has the war not been discussed, or taught to the young, over forty years after its end? Are we perpetually doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past because we are too stubborn to learn from them? We need not get into the prickly thicket of diagnosing the reasons for the federal governments attempts to fool the world about what happened in Biafra. However, it may be helpful to start by defining the term genocide. Robert S. Leventhal provides this description: The term genocide derives from the Latin (genos = race, tribe; cide = killing) and means literally the killing or murder of an entire tribe or people. The Oxford English Dictionary defines genocide as the deliberate and systematic extermination of an ethnic or national group. . . . By genocide we mean the destruction of a nation or an ethnic group. The UN General Assembly adopted this term and defined it in 1946 as  . . . a denial of the right of existence of entire human groups.2 The Arguments Throughout the conflict the Biafrans consistently charged that the Nigerians had a design to exterminate the Igbo people from the face of the earth. This calculation, the Biafrans insisted, was predicated on a holy jihad proclaimed by mainly Islamic extremists in the Nigerian army and supported by the policies of economic blockade that prevented shipments of humanitarian aid, food, and supplies to the needy in Biafra.1 The argument extended by Harold Wilsons government in defense of the federal government of Nigeria is important to highlight: The charges of Jihad have also been denied by British officials who assert that more than half the members of the Federal Government are Christian, while only 1,000 of the 6070,000 Federal soldiers are Muslim Hausas from the North. (House of Commons Debate, cited earlier.)2 Herbert Ekwe-Ekwe, professor of history and politics and an expert on genocide, reminds us that supporters of the Biafran position point not only to the histrionic pronouncements of the leaders of the Nigerian armyoften dismissed as typical outrageous wartime rhetoricbut to an actual series of atrocities, real crimes against humanity, that occurred on the battlefield and as a result of the policies of the federal government of Nigeria. The International Committee in the Investigation of Crimes of Genocide carried out exhaustive investigation of the evidence, interviewing 1082 people representing all the actors in the dispute (the two sides of the civil war and international collaborators). After a thorough painstaking research, the Commission concludes, through its Investigator (Dr. Mensah of Ghana): Finally I am of the opinion that in many of the cases cited to me hatred of the Biafrans (mainly Igbos) and a wish to exterminate them was a foremost motivational factor. [Emphasis in original.]3 In his well-researched book The Brutality of Nations, Dan Jacobs uncovers a provocative paragraph from an editorial in the Washington Post of July 2, 1969: One word now describes the policy of the Nigerian military government towards secessionist Biafra: genocide. It is ugly and extreme but it is the only word which fits Nigerias decision to stop the International Committee of the Red Cross, and other relief agencies, from flying food to Biafra.4 Jacobs also reveals the lamentations of Pope Paul VI over the Nigeria-Biafra War: The war seems to be reaching its conclusion, with the terror of possible reprisals and massacres against defenseless people worn out by deprivations, by hunger and by the loss of all they possess. The news this morning is very alarming. . . . One fear torments public opinion. The fear that the victory of arms may carry with it the killing of numberless people. There are those who actually fear a kind of genocide.5 The distinguished American historian, social critic, and political insider Arthur M. Schlesinger provides this contribution on the dire situation in Biafra: The terrible tragedy of the people of Biafra has now assumed catastrophic dimensions. Starvation is daily claiming the lives of an estimated 6,000 Igbo tribesmen, most of them children. If adequate food is not delivered to the people in the immediate future hundreds of thousands of human beings will die of hunger.6 In what is likely to be the most compelling statement of the era from an American president, Schlesinger provides this powerful extract from Richard Nixons campaign speech on September 10, 1968: Until now efforts to relieve the Biafran people have been thwarted by the desire of the central government of Nigeria to pursue total and unconditional victory and by the fear of the Ibo [sic] people that surrender means wholesale atrocities and genocide. But genocide is what is taking place right nowand starvation is the grim reaper. This is not the time to stand on ceremony, or to go through channels or to observe the diplomatic niceties. The destruction of an entire people is an immoral objective even in the most moral of wars. It can never be justified; it can never be condoned.7 Two distinguished Canadian diplomats, Mr. Andrew Brevin and Mr. David MacDonald (members of the Canadian Parliament), reported that genocide is in fact taking place [and] one of them stated that anybody who says there is no evidence of genocide is either in the pay of Britain or being a deliberate fool, following a visit to the war-torn region.8 New York Times journalist Lloyd Garrison, who covered the conflict, submitted harrowing accounts of genocidal activity on the part of the Nigerian troops: The record shows that in Federal advances . . . thousands of Igbo male civilians were sought out and slaughtered.9 Supporters of the Nigerian federal government position maintain that a war was being waged and the premise of all wars is for one side to emerge as the victor. Overly ambitious actors may have taken actions unbecoming of international conventions of human rights, but these things happen everywhere. This same group often cites findings from groups (sanctioned by the Nigerian federal government) that sent observers to the country during the crisis that there was no clear intent on behalf of the Nigerian troops to wipe out the Igbo people, . . . pointing out that over 30,000 Igbos still lived in Lagos, and half a million in the Mid-West.10 The British government, wary of the morally bankrupt position that Harold Wilson had toed from the onset of the conflict, sought to explain away their reckless military adventure in Africa. There were real excesses to account for: If the diabolical disregard for human life seen during the war was not due to the Northern military elites jihadist or genocidal obsession, then why were there more small arms used on Biafran soil than during the entire five-year period of World War II?11 Why were there one hundred thousand casualties on the much larger Nigerian side compared with more than two millionmainly children Biafrans killed? The government of Harold Wilson proffered what it called a legitimate strategy excuse in which it postulates that the indisputable excesses seen during the war were due to the Nigerian militarys excellenceclearly making it the strongest candidate for an all-time foot-in-the-mouth prize.12 The Case Against the Nigerian Government It is important to point out that most Nigerians were against the war and abhorred the senseless violence that ensued as a result of the conflict. Gowons wartime cabinet, it should also be remembered, was full of intellectuals like Obafemi Awolowo and Anthony Enahoro and superpermanent secretaries like Allison Akene Ayida among others who came up with a boatload of infamous and regrettable policies. A statement credited to Chief Obafemi Awolowo and echoed by his cohorts is the most callous and unfortunate: All is fair in war, and starvation is one of the weapons of war. I dont see why we should feed our enemies fat in order for them to fight harder.1 It is my impression that Chief Obafemi Awolowo was driven by an overriding ambition for power, for himself in particular and for the advancement of his Yoruba people in general. And let it be said that there is, on the surface, at least, nothing wrong with those aspirations. However, Awolowo saw the dominant Igbos at the time as the obstacles to that goal, and when the opportunity arosethe Nigeria-Biafra Warhis ambition drove him into a frenzy to go to every length to achieve his dreams. In the Biafran case it meant hatching up a diabolical policy to reduce the numbers of his enemies significantly through starvationeliminating over two million people, mainly members of future generations. If Gowon was the Nigerian Abraham Lincoln,2 as Lord Wilson would have us believe, why did he not put a stop to such an evil policy, or at least temper it, particularly when there was international outcry? Setting aside for the moment the fact that Gowon as head of state bears the final responsibility of his subordinates, and that Awolowo has been much maligned by many an intellectual for this unfortunate policy and his statements, why, I wonder, would other thinkers, such as Ayida and Enahoro, not question such a policy but advance it?3 The federal governments actions soon after the war could be seen not as conciliatory but as outright hostile.4 After the conflict ended the same hard-liners in the Federal government of Nigeria cast Igbos in the role of treasonable felons and wreckers of the nation and got the regime to adopt a banking policy which nullified any bank account which had been operated during the war by the Biafrans. A flat sum of twenty pounds was approved for each Igbo depositor of the Nigerian currency, regardless of the amount of deposit.5 If there was ever a measure put in place to stunt, or even obliterate, the economy of a people, this was it. After that outrageous charade, the leaders of the federal government of Nigeria sought to devastate the resilient and emerging Eastern commercial sector even further by banning the importation of secondhand clothing and stockfish two trade items that they knew the burgeoning market towns of Onitsha, Aba, and Nnewi needed to reemerge. Their fear was that these communities, fully reconstituted, would then serve as the economic engines for the reconstruction of the entire Eastern Region. The Enterprises Promotion Decree of 1974, also known as the Indigenization Decree, was ostensibly pushed through by the leaders of the federal government in order to force foreign holders of majority shares of companies operating in Nigeria to hand over the preponderance of stocks, bonds, and shares to local Nigerian business interests. The move was sold to the public as some sort of pro-African liberation strategy to empower Nigerian businesses and shareholders. The chicanery of the entire scheme of course was quite evident. Having stripped a third of the Nigerian population of the means to acquire capital, the leaders of the government of Nigeria knew that the former Biafrans, by and large, would not have the financial muscle to participate in this plot.6 The end result, they hoped, would be a permanent shifting of the balance of economic power away from the East to other constituencies.7 Consequently, very few Igbos participated, and many of the jobs and positions in most of the sectors of the economy previously occupied by Easterners went to those from other parts of the country. Ironically, and to the consternation of Lord Wilson and the British cabinet in England, the Enterprises Promotion Decree of 1974 also meant that the British/Dutch conglomerate Royal Dutch/Shell BP and other holdings valued at $720 million at the time, would have to share ownership of oil investments with the federal governmentthe very development Wilson was trying to avoid by backing Gowon in the first place.8 For those who would defend Gowons cabinet, suggesting that at times of war measures of all kinds are taken to ensure victory, I will counter by stating that the Geneva Conventions were instituted after the Holocaust to make sure that human rights are still protected in times of conflict. There are many international observers who believe that Gowons actions after the war were magnanimous and laudable.9 There are tons of treatises that talk about how the Igbo were wonderfully integrated into Nigeria. Well, I have news for them: The Igbo were not and continue not to be reintegrated into Nigeria, one of the main reasons for the countrys continued backwardness, in my estimation.10 Borrowing a large leaf from the American Marshal Plan that followed World War II and resulted in the reconstruction of Europe, the federal government of Nigeria launched an elaborate scheme highlighted by three Rsfor Reconstruction, Rehabilitation, and Reconciliation. The only difference is that, unlike the Americans who actually carried out all three prongs of the strategy, Nigerias federal government did not. The administrator of East Central state, Mr. Ukpabi Asika, announced that Eastern Nigeria required close to half a billion pounds to complete the reconstruction effort. None of us recall that he received anything close to a fraction of the request. What has consistently escaped most Nigerians in this entire travesty is the fact that mediocrity destroys the very fabric of a country as surely as a war ushering in all sorts of banality, ineptitude, corruption, and debauchery. Nations enshrine mediocrity as their modus operandi, and create the fertile ground for the rise of tyrants and other base elements of the society, by silently assenting to the dismantling of systems of excellence because they do not immediately benefit one specific ethnic, racial, political, or special-interest group. That, in my humble opinion, is precisely where Nigeria finds itself today! Gowon Responds To get General Gowons point of view on a number of the same questions that I have raised in this section of this book, I asked the eminent journalist and writer Pini Jason to interview the former Nigerian head of state. A portion of the interview is reproduced here: PINI JASON: The Igbo still believe that they are being punished because of the civil war. The Indigenization Decree is an [action], they point out, that was taken when the group was economically weakened and thus, as it were, kept them out of playing a role in the economy. They still feel they are being punished because of the civil war. GOWON: It is a pity that they think this way. The Indigenization Decree I think it was 1972 or 73that decree was really to ensure the participation of every part of the country, unlike the privatization policy now in place. Businesses are indigenized within ones own areain the North, in the East, in the West, etc. And who are the beneficiaries in those areas? It is mostly the people native to the particular area. And I am sure that by 1972, many Igbo had recovered sufficiently enough to participate, not only in their own area, but also in Lagos. You tell me, who owns most of Lagos? PINI JASON (CUTTING IN): Two years with twenty pounds; the Igbo were still trying to find their feet! They were in no position to buy into any company! GOWON: No. Remember, what was being indigenized before it was speeded up were some of the small Lebanese businesses, like textile stores, in which, in any case, the Igbo were very well established, yesterday, today, and even tomorrow. Probably in Lagos, they were not able to buy into as many such businesses as they would have desired. Otherwise, certainly I know that by 1972 there was sufficient recovery enabling the Igbo to participate. Now the incident of twenty pounds that you refer to was enforced immediately at the end of the war. Because your economic gurus will tell you that because of your economic value, you cannot exchange the Biafran note; what is it called? PINI JASON: The Biafran pound. GOWON: Is it the Biafran pound? But now, I am told that it is selling like hotcake! I am told that it is being used especially in the West Coast! So I said, Well, you see the ingenuity of the Igbo man? [General laughter] People say it is even more valuable than the naira! PINI JASON: Maybe as a collectors item! GOWON: But there it is! No. I think the policy of twenty pounds was never an attempt to impoverish the Igbo people. The government was very generous in giving funds to Ukpabi Asika so that the government of the East could circulate money and get businesses off the ground, as well as [to] embark on various rehabilitations and reconstructions that were taking place. Probably the exchange rate in Nigerian currency for the Biafran pound seemed not to be on equitable terms. If we said they could exchange at par . . . PINI JASON (CUTTING IN): I would have been a millionaire! GOWON: Youre telling me! [General laughter] And probably bought off the rest of the country! That was not the policy of indigenization. It was meant to help. For example, the government was able to provide Asika with funds so that people could get Nigerian currency even as a loan. It was probably some of the bigger businesses indigenized later that you are talking about, but that occurred only after my overthrow. The government of Obasanjo, I think between 1975 and 79, speeded up taking over some of the big businesses, especially in Lagos, which was to the advantage of his people, because they were the ones on the spot, and a lot of their people were in the banks and knew how to use the banks to give loans to their own people to buy some of these things. But this was not the case in other parts of the country. So when it comes to that, you can rest assured that it was not only the Igbo that felt left out; other parts of the country that were not as well positioned as the people from the West felt the same way. PINI JASON: Another issue was that of abandoned property, especially in Rivers state, and the context in which your government allowed some property belonging to the Igbo to be taken over. The case was made by the new Rivers state government that its people were like tenants in their own state. After you left office it became clear that several individuals actively exploited the issue, buying up former Igbo-owned property and using these properties as collaterals for business ventures, often obtaining loans from banks controlled by certain people with anti-Igbo sentiments. Many blamed [this] series of developments around abandoned property on you. What is your reaction? GOWON: There was no doubt that it was a very knotty issue. I think there should have been justice and fair play. And as far as I was concerned, although pressure was being brought by the governor and the government of Rivers state at the time, my position was, if any property was to be taken for the use of the government, it had to pay proper compensation. And true enough, I think at the time, there were many Igbo who wanted to sell their property. Therefore, there was hardly any problem from that point of view. But I know that later the Rivers state indigenes themselves became fully involved, and virtually pressurized the subsequent government. I think, honestly, that a lot of the damage was not done during our time. At least, we were keeping it under control, and working hard to ensure that there was justice. Since it was one Nigeria, we must allow people who wanted to come back to at least come back to their business and properties. But I know that quite a lot of this did not happen subsequently, and it left a very bad feeling that, as you said, the Igbo were being penalized because of the war. I am not sure of what really happened at that time, since I was away from the country. But I know that my effort was not to deprive people of their property. Those who wanted to sell did so at the market price at the time. But those properties the government wanted for their use, it was to pay the economic rate at the time. Of course, policies changed thereafter.1 Nigerias Painful Transitions: A Reappraisal The post Nigeria-Biafra civil war era saw a unified Nigeria saddled with a greater and more insidious reality. We were plagued by a homegrown enemy: the political ineptitude, mediocrity, indiscipline, ethnic bigotry, and corruption of the ruling class. Compounding the situation was the fact that Nigeria was now awash in oil-boom petrodollars, and to make matters even worse, the countrys young, affable, military head of state, General Yakubu Gowon, ever so cocksure following his victory, proclaimed to the entire planet that Nigeria had more money than it knew what to do with. A new era of great decadence and decline was born. It continues to this day. At this point, the intellectuals, particularly the writers, were faced with a conundrum. We could no longer pass off this present problem simply to our complicated past and the cold war raging in the background, however significant these factors were. We could not absolve ourselves from the need to take hold of the events of the day and say, Okay, we have had a difficult past. . . . From today, this is the program we have; lets look at what we have not done. Of course, putting it this dramatically makes the matter appear simple. However, it became crystal clear that we needed to fight this new enemy with everything at our disposal. Most important, Nigeria needed to identify the right leader with the right kind of character, education, and background. Someone who would understand what was at stakewhere Africa had been, and where it needed to go. For the second time in our short history we had to face the disturbing fact that Nigeria needed to liberate itself anew, this time not from a foreign power but from our own corrupt, inept brothers and sisters! After waiting around a while and determining that no messiah was about to come down and save the day, some of us joined the political process. I joined the left-of-center Peoples Redemption Party and was appointed its deputy national president. The goal of being an active participant in Nigerian politics would be to elevate the national discourse to a level that stirred up the pot, if you like, and got Nigerians to begin to ask critical questions about their future, such as: How can the country conduct free and fair elections? How can we elect the right kind of leaders and ensure that they will keep to the tenure that was agreed upon? How do we ensure that our leaders dont double their tenure, or even change it into a dynasty to hand over to their sons? My sojourn in politics was marked by disappointment, frustration, and the realization that despite the fact that there were a few upright political figures like Mallam Aminu Kano, the vast majority of the characters I encountered in the political circles were there for their own selfish advancement. Having grand ideas was fine, but their execution required a strong leader. And clearly, Nigerias principal problem was identifying and putting in place that elusive leader.  That road to a remedy of Nigerias political problems will not come easily. The key, as I see it, lies in the manner in which the leadership of the country is selected. When I refer to leadership I am really talking about leaders at every level of government and sphere of society, from the local government council and governors right up to the presidency. What I am calling for is for Nigeria to develop a version of campaign election and campaign finance reform, so that the country can transform its political system from the grassroots level right through to the national party structures at the federal level. Nigerians will have to find a way to do away with the present system of godfatherisman archaic, corrupt practice in which individuals with lots of money and time to spare (many of them half-baked, poorly educated thugs) sponsor their chosen candidates and push them right through to the desired political position, bribing, threatening, and, on occasion, murdering any opposition in the process. We will have to make sure that the electoral body overseeing elections is run by widely respected and competent officials chosen by a nonpartisan group free of governmental influence or interference. Finally, we have to find a way to open up the political process to every Nigerian citizen. Today we have a system where only those individuals with the means of capital and who can both pay the exorbitant application fee and fund a political campaign can vie for the presidency. It would not surprise any close observer to discover that in this inane system, the same unsavory characters who have destroyed the country and looted the treasury and the nation blind are the ones able to run for the presidency! The question of choice in selecting a leader in Nigeria is often an academic exercise, due to the election rigging, violence, and intimidation of the general public, particularly by those in power, but also by those with the meansthe rich and influential. There is also the unpleasant factor of the violence associated with partisan politics that is often designed to keep balanced, well-educated, fairminded Nigerians away. So it can be said that the massesthe followership we are concerned aboutdont really have a choice of leadership, because theres not a true democratic process.1 It may appear impossible now to rectify, because weve allowed this situation of confusion to go on since our independence. It has been growing steadily worse . . . and it accelerated particularly under the military, when there was a near total denial of the democratic rights of the people. The general knowledge that a people have, for example, inalienable rights is simply something advanced societies take for granted, because they have fostered stable democracies now for some time. I am asked, Why dont the people fight back? Well, once a people have been dispossessed and subjugated by dictatorships for such a long time as in Nigerias case, the oppressive process also effectively strips away from the minds of the people the knowledge that they have rights. Restoring flawed democratic systems will not make the country a success overnight.  The Igbo are a very democratic people. The Igbo people expressed a strong antimonarchy sentimentEzebuilowhich literally means, a king is an enemy. Their culture illustrates a clear-cut opposition to kings, because, I think, the Igbo people had seen what the uncontrolled power of kings could do. There is no doubt that in their history they experienced the high-handedness of kings, so they decided that a king cannot be a trusted friend of the people without checks and balances. And they tried to construct all kinds of arrangements to whittle down the menace of those with the will to power, because such people are there in large numbers in every society. So the Igbo created all kinds of titles that cost much to acquire. Aspirants to titles, in the end, become impoverished in the process and end up with very little. So that individual begins again, and by the time his life is over, he has a lot of prestige but very little power. Democracy is the very antithesis of military or absolutist rule. And democracy is not a fancy word; it is something that is full of meaning, even in our ancient African cultures. Dictatorships by their very nature concentrate power and the resources of the state in the hands of a very few people (or, as we have seen in Africa, in one persons hands). Dictators hang on to power by resorting to tactics designed to keep the mass of the people silent and docile. Dictatorships that have used violence, murder, and bribery, and psychological, financial, and social intimidation to force the opposition into perpetual retreat are many and widespread.2 This is not a time to bemoan all the challenges ahead. It is a time to work at developing, nurturing, sustaining, and protecting democracy and democratic institutions. Winston Churchill perceptively said, Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all those other forms that have been tried from time to time.3 We have to go by that wisdom. Therein lies an opportunity for Great Britain, America, and the West to be involved positively in African affairs, this time not by imposing themselves or their self-selected rulers on a desperate continent but by aiding African nations in their struggles to become viable democracies. We also realize that we must learn patience and not expect instant miracles. Building a nation is not something a people does in one regime, or even in a few years; its a very long process. The Chinese had their chance to emerge as the leading nation in the world in the Middle Ages but were consumed by interethnic political posturing and wars and had to wait another five hundred years for another chance! Another crucial ingredient in sustaining a democracy is the ability to stage free and fair elections. The last general election in Nigeria was not perfect, but overall it was an improvement over past travesties that were passed off as elections in Nigeria. The Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC), Chairman (and professor) Attahiru Muhammadu Jega, and his team should be allowed to build upon the gains of that exercise for the good of the nation.  I think it is important to discuss some real events that occurred during Nigerias Fourth Republic (circa 2004), during which the very opposite of the democratic ideal was at work. Anambra state, the past home of several venerated Nigerians, such as Nnamdi Azikiwe, the Okigbo brothersPius and ChristopherKenneth Dike, and otherswas literally and figuratively on fire. There was a succession of events during a tussle for political power that resulted in renegades arresting a sitting governor and buildings being looted and government property ransacked and burned to the ground by hoodlumsthose infamous rent-a-crowd hooligans at the beck and call of corrupt politicians with plenty of money and very low IQs. What seemed almost incredible to me was that it was clear from all accounts that the presidency was behind the chaos in the statewas encouraging the destabilization of the government of Anambra state as well as encouraging a small group of people whose sole interest seemed to be in getting their hands on the financial allocation made to the state. In other words, to use the money that was intended for work on the state for their own private endsand that these were friends of the president. For any clear-headed observer such a scenario would be unimaginablethat the head of state, or his government or his office, should be encouraging crime in one of the federations constituent states, encouraging anarchy in a part of the country, Nigeria. That state, of course, as you might know, is also my home state. Its also part of Igbo land, which has had a peculiar history in Nigeria, some of which involves this particular former president of Nigeriahis attitude to this part of Nigeria, which he and some like him consider responsible for the troubles of the Nigerian civil war. And so it just seemed to me totally irresponsible for leadership to be involved, to be promoting chaos instead of preventing it. It was in a sense the very end of government itself, where government leaps beyond the precipice, dismisses itself, and joins ranks with crime.4 I decided that I wasnt going to be part of any of this. Elie Wiesel reminds us, There may be times when we are powerless to prevent injustice, but there must never be a time when we fail to protest.5 I had very little at my disposal to protest with, so the strongest statement I could make was to turn down the honor of commander of the federal republic, which I was awarded. Corruption and Indiscipline Corruption in Nigeria has grown because it is highly encouraged. In The Trouble with Nigeria I suggest, Nigerians are corrupt because the system they live under today makes corruption easy and profitable. They will cease to be corrupt when corruption is made difficult and unattractive. Twenty-eight years after that slim book was published, I can state categorically that the problem of corruption and indiscipline is probably worse today than its ever been, because of the massive way in which the Nigerian leadership is using the nations wealth to corrupt, really to destroy, the country, so no improvement or change can happen. Recently, out of despair, I stated, Corruption in Nigeria has passed the alarming and entered the fatal stage, and Nigeria will die if we continue to pretend that she is only slightly indisposed. The World Bank recently released numbers indicating that about $400 billion has been pilfered from Nigerias treasury since independence. One needs to stop for a moment to wrap ones mind around that incredible figure. This amount $400 billionis approximately the gross domestic products of Norway and of Sweden. In other words, Nigerias corrupt ruling class stole the equivalent of the entire economy of a European country in four decades! This theft of national funds is one of the factors essentially making it impossible for Nigeria to succeed. Nigerians alone are not responsible. We all know that this corrupt cabal of Nigerians in power has friends abroad who not only help it move the billions abroad and help them hide the money, but also shield the perpetrators from prosecution! State Failure and the Rise of Terrorism In 2011, Nigeria was ranked number fourteen in the Failed States Index,1 just below other havens of stabilityAfghanistan, Somalia, and Iraq! State failure has many definitions, so I will bother the reader with only two short descriptions relevant to the Nigerian situation: [A failed state] is one that is unable to perform its duties on several levels: when violence cascades into an all-out internal war, when standards of living massively deteriorate, when the infrastructure of ordinary life decays, and when the greed of rulers overwhelms their responsibilities to better their people and their surroundings.2 [Failed States are seen in] instances in which central state authority collapses for several years.3 Economic deprivation and corruption produce and exacerbate financial and social inequities in a population, which in turn fuel political instability. Within this environment, extremists of all kindsparticularly religious zealots and other political mischief makersfind a foothold to recruit supporters and sympathizers to help them launch terrorist attacks and wreak havoc in the lives of ordinary citizens.4 Over eight hundred deaths, mainly in Northern Nigeria, have been attributed to the militant Islamist sect Boko Haram5 since its formation in 2002. The groups ultimate goal, we are told, is to overthrow the Nigerian government and create an Islamic state.6 In many respects, Nigerias federal government has always tolerated terrorism. For over half a century the federal government has turned a blind eye to waves of ferocious and savage massacres of its citizens mainly Christian Southerners; mostly Igbos or indigenes of the Middle Belt; and otherswith impunity. Even in cases where their hands were found dripping in blood, the perpetrators have many a time evaded capture and punishment. Nigeria has been doomed to witness endless cycles of inter-ethnic, inter-religious violence because the Nigerian government has failed woefully to enforce laws protecting its citizens from wanton violence, particularly attacks against nonindigenes living in disparate parts of the country. The notoriously (some say conveniently so) incompetent Nigerian federal government, and some religious and political leaders, have been at least enablers of these evil acts. I have stated elsewhere that this mindless carnage will end only with the dismantling of the present corrupt political system and banishment of the cult of mediocrity that runs it, hopefully through a peaceful, democratic process. State Resuscitation and Recovery Many pundits see a direct link between crude oil and the corruption in Nigeria, that putting in place an elaborate system preventing politicians or civilians from having access to petrodollars is probably a major part of a series of fixes needed to reduce large-scale corruption. For most people the solution is straightforward: If you commit a crime, you should be brought to book. Hold people responsible for misconduct and punish them if they are guilty. In a country such as Nigeria, where there are no easy fixes, one must examine the issue of accountability, which has to be a strong component of the fight against corruption. Every Nigerian knows that there should be accountability, that people should be accountable. But if the presidentthe person running the whole showhas all of the power and resources of the country in his control, and he is also the one who selects who should be probed or not, clearly we will have an uneven system in which those who are favored by the emperor have free rein to loot the treasury with reckless abandon, while those who are disliked or tell the emperor that he is not wearing any clothes get marched swiftly to the guillotine! Nigerias story has not been, entirely, one long, unrelieved history of despair. Fifty years after independence Nigerians have begun to ask themselves the hard questions: How can the state of anarchy be reversed? What are the measures that can be taken to prevent corrupt candidates from recycling themselves into positions of leadership? Young Nigerians have often come to me desperately seeking solutions to several conundrums: How do we begin to solve these problems in Nigeria, where the structures are present but there is no accountability? Other pressing questions include: How does Nigeria bring all the human and material resources it has to bear on its development? How do we clean up the Niger Delta? What do we need to do to bring an end to organized ethnic bigotry? How can we place the necessary checks and balances in place that will reduce the decadence, corruption, and debauchery of the past several decades? How can we ensure even and sustained development? And so forth. . . . And that would be a big debate to keep Nigeria busy for a long time. The Sovereign National Conference that was held a couple of years ago was a good idea. I believe the concept was righta platform to discuss Nigerias problems and challenges and pave a path forwardhowever, the execution was not. Debate about a nations future should not turn into an excuse for politicians to drink or feast on meals in Abuja. It should continue for decades, in small forums, in schools, offices, on the radio, on TV, in markets, in our newspapers, and on the streets, until we get things right. Most advanced nations in the world constantly appraise and reappraise their countries paths and destinies. I foresee the Nigerian solution will come in stages. First we have to nurture and strengthen our democratic institutionsand strive for the freest and fairest elections possible. That will place the true candidates of the people in office. Under the rubric of a democracy, a free press can thrive and a strong justice system can flourish. The checks and balances we have spoken about and the laws needed to curb corruption will then naturally find a footing. A new patriotic consciousness has to be developed, not one based simply on the well-worn notion of the unity of Nigeria or faith in Nigeria often touted by our corrupt leaders, but one based on an awareness of the responsibility of leaders to the led on the sacredness of their anointment to leadand disseminated by civil society, schools, and intellectuals. It is from this kind of environment that a leader, humbled by the trust placed upon him by the people, will emerge, willing to use the power given to him for the good of the people. AFTER A WAR After a war life catches desperately at passing hints of normalcy like vines entwining a hollow twig; its famished roots close on rubble and every piece of broken glass. Irritations we used to curse return to joyous tables like prodigals home from the city. . . . The meter man serving my maiden bill brought a friendly face to my circle of sullen strangers and me smiling gratefully to the door. After a war we clutch at watery scum pulsating on listless eddies of our spent deluge. . . . Convalescent dancers rising too soon to rejoin their circle dance our powerless feet intent as before but no longer adept contrive only half-remembered eccentric steps. After years of pressing death and dizzy last-hour reprieves were glad to dump our fears and our perilous gains together in one shallow grave and flee the same rueful way we came straight home to haunted revelry.1 POSTSCRIPT: THE EXAMPLE OF NELSON MANDELA N ot too long ago my attention was caught by a radio news item about Africa. As I had come to expect, it was not good news, and it was not presented with, nor did it deserve, respect. It was something of a joke. This was the announcement of the death of President Eyadema of Togo, whom it described as the longest-serving president in Africa (or maybe the worldI forget which). Then it gave another detail: Eyadema had died from a heart attack even as he was about to be flown to Europe for treatment. And it concluded with the information that Eyademas son would succeed him as the next president of Togo! If Eyadema stayed that long because he was so good, why was there no hospital in Togo to attend to his condition? Did Eyadema, who had given nothing but bad news to Togo since the 1960s, imagine that the solution to problems created largely by him would be solved by a dynasty of Eyademas? Which reminded me of another First Son: the son of the president of Equatorial Guinea, who was seen around the world on television as he shopped extravagantly in Paris for expensive clothes. Unfortunately, he seemed no less a bum in the suits he was trying on than out of them.1 This event brought me once again face-to-face with Africas leadership charade. What do African leaders envision for their countries and their people? I wondered yet again. Have they not heard that where there is no vision the people perish? Does the judgment of history on their rule mean anything to them? Do they remember how a man called Mandela, who had spent twenty-seven years in prison for South Africa, gave up the presidency of that countrya position that he so richly deservedafter only four years and made way for another and younger patriot? Why do African leaders choose bad models like Malawian president Kamuzu Banda instead of good ones like Mandela? Have they considered how Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe has ruined the cause of land distribution by demagoguery and a thirty-year tenancy in power? Which makes me wonder whether any of these life presidents consider how Mandela became the beacon of justice and hope on the continent, indeed for the world. For those who do not know, Mandela did not have an easy life. He fought alongside African heroes such as Steve Biko, Walter Sisulu, and Oliver Tambo, among other brave activists, for the liberation of his people from one of the most racist systems the world has ever known. For his efforts, he was sent to prison. Most men would have been broken, or consumed by bitterness. But not Mandela. This giant among men walked free that fateful day, on February 11, 1990, after nearly three decades of imprisonment on Robben Island, hands held high, fist in the air. His release was beamed across the planet. The world was pleased, but nowhere as ecstatic as his African brethren around the globe, who saw in Mandela the personification of their highest aspirations and the embodiment of the kind of leadership Africa needs desperately. Mandela has delivered magnificently on those dreams. And it is to this great man, lovingly known as Madibafather of the nation of South Africa, antiapartheid leader, lawyer, writer, intellectual, humanitarianthat present and future African leaders must all go for sustenance and inspiration. APPENDIX Brigadier Banjos Broadcast to Mid-West1 NOTE: BRIGADIER BANJO WAS THE COMMANDER OF THE BIAFRAN INVASION Benin, August 14, 1967, at 20:00 GMT. Fellow Nigerians and Biafrans, I am sure I do not need to introduce myself either to you nor perhaps to many people outside our country. You have already had ample opportunity to hear of my name in January 1966 when this political crisis started in our country. Unfortunately at that time I also only heard about the circumstances under which my name was being publicized at a time when I was in no position to do anything about it. I was then accused of having attempted the life of the late Supreme Commander, Maj.-Gen. J. T. U. AguiyiIronsi, and that for the attempt I have been arrested and detained. Fellow Nigerians, nothing could be further from the truth. The mutiny in the Army which started the revolution in January 1966 was as much of a surprise to myself as it was to some of my colleagues. I spent all of my time [words indistinct] of the events in ascertaining the true state of affairs in the country. My colleague, then Lt.-Col. Yakubu Gowon, was the first officer who gave me precise information about the state of affairs. It then appeared to me that sufficient had taken place to ensure the removal of several Governments of the Federation and that the sum total of the trend of events could be regarded as the beginning of a national revolution. I then considered it my duty to ensure that no further military action took place which might have the effect of totally destroying the stability of the nation. I felt that the young officers who had started the action were only anxious to destroy what had become a most corrupt and discredited Government. As such, I spent a considerable time in an effort to urge the late Major General to assume responsibility for the State with the support of the Army from national collapse. It was then my view that any attempt to use the Nigerian Army for any military action within Nigeria would only have the effect of breaking the Army into its tribal components of which the Northern component would represent the lions share. This Northern component, effectively under the control of the Northern feudalists, would then inevitably be employed to impose on the rest of Nigeria the most repressive feudal domination. I was one of the senior officers of the Nigerian Army who took the decision to accept responsibility for Nigeria. In fact, on that occasion I was the chief spokesman for that decision. I therefore considered it my duty to remain with the General as closely as possible rather than accept the office of the Military Governor of the West which he then proposed to me and which I declined in favor of the late Lt.-Col. Adekunle Fajuyi. On the day after the General had assumed full responsibility for the State I was arrested by a few of my colleagues while waiting to see the General. I was never given a reason for my arrest, nor given an opportunity to defend myself against any charges that could be raised. I went to prison for 14 months under a false accusation, the details of which I only found out from the press and radio after I got to prison. I have since had the opportunity of speaking to the so-called actors in that drama of my arrest, and I now appreciate that the action was an act of hatred motivated primarily by fear and suspicion. I spent a considerable part of my time in prison sending warnings to the late Major-General and my colleagues about the policies that would appear to represent a continuation of the policies of the Balewa Government, which could have the effect of encouraging counterattempts, which might not only destroy the Nigerian Army but would also, by the extent of the bloodshed and the tribal selectiveness of the [word indistinct], destroy the Nigerian nation as well. The inevitable has now happened, which would seem to confirm that my fears were well-founded. There is now an army at the disposal of the feudal North, an army that has lost all the traditions, discipline, and standards of a responsible army. There is now a Government of the Federation that is sustained by violence and is therefore tied to the ambitions of the Northern Feudalists. There has been a considerable amount of bloodshed, chaos, and tribal bitterness among such people. Such tribal rivalry, as used to be exploited by our previous political parties for the harnessing of the opinion of the North and its people, is now translating itself into a most extreme form of brutality and of despicable savagery. Finally, the dismemberment of our nation has commenced in the breakaway of Biafra. In August 1966, I wrote to my colleagues from prison to inform them that I did not consider that we, military leaders of this country, had the right to carry out such action as the proclamation of the dismemberment of presiding over the dismemberment of Nigeria. I still do not think that we have the right to destroy a nation that was handed over to us to save at a moment of crisis. The 29th July 1966 Federal Military Government came into being as a result of a mutiny in which the primary action was directed at the elimination of a particular ethnic group and the supremacy of another ethnic group in Nigeria. This has had the effect of destroying the basic mutual trust and confidence among the people of Nigeria and has created the decentralization of the Nigerian people into tribal groups. This action, more than any other event that has occurred throughout the history of Nigeria, has had the greatest effect on the dismemberment of Nigeria. The Federal Military Government cannot claim to represent the Government of the people of Nigeria and to fight for the unity of Nigeria while constantly rejecting fundamental human rights for all people forming parts of Nigeria. The Federal Military Government cannot claim to be seeking a peaceful solution to the problems of achieving Nigerian unity while at the same time contemptuously ignoring the wishes of the people of the MidWest and the West in their previous demands for the removal of the unruly troops of the North from their territories in order to allow the unfettered discussion of the present political crisis. The Federal Military Government cannot claim to be genuinely interested in the progress and welfare of the Nigerian people while at the same time inflicting the bloodiest warfare on the people of Nigeria and employing unscrupulous foreign mercenaries in a total war that really destroys hundreds of our people and the economy of our nation. . . . The people of Biafra have a right to fight a Government that has constantly treated its people to the most savage forms of brutality and persists in denying these people its fundamental human rights while claiming to represent other interests. It is my view that the people of Biafra were prepared to remain part of the nation into which they have for so many years invested their resources of manpower and material and with which they had the closest social ties. Provided the people of Biafra could live within such a nation under a Government that truly represents all sections of its people and truly tries to pursue such measures as are designed to promote the welfare of all Nigerians irrespective of tribe or religion [sic] [sentence as broadcast]. It is the remnants of the old Nigerian Army that broke away in July that now threatens the Nigerian nation. This Northern army is now under the power and control of a group of Northern feudalists who have as their aim the total conquest of Nigeria. The Federal Military Government, having been brought to power and control by that army, is playing to that end. Hence policies are inevitably directed toward achieving the objectives of the Northern feudalists who control that army. . . . It is my idea that the peaceful settlement of the Nigerian problem will be readily achieved when that fragment of the Nigerian Army now at the disposal of the Northern feudalists has been completely disarmed. Toward this end, the Liberation Army is irrevocably committed. It is not at all an invasion, and it is not intended to promote the domination of any group of the Nigerian people by any other group through the presence of the Liberation Army. I wish to stress once again what I said during the press conference and previously on the radio, that the movement of this Army into the Mid-West is not a conquest. It is also not an invasion. It is to enable the people of the Mid-West to see the Nigerian problem in its proper perspective. I firmly believe that the people of the MidWest would prefer to be able to declare their stand in the conflict that has arisen in Nigeria free from any [pressure] either from the North or from anywhere. I believe that the people of the Mid-West would like to be given an opportunity to state their case, free from the coercive influences due to the presence of Northern troops. It is my view that the political future of Nigeria rests with all the people of Nigeria. It has become a matter of great concern to me, however, to be informed that certain ethnic groups are jubilating as a result of the presence of the Liberation Army in this Region. As a consequence, I also understand that certain other ethnic groups are feeling depressed and frustrated. I wish to assure all ethnic groups in the Mid-West that the achievement of the Liberation Army does not give any ethnic group an advantage over any other. I wish also to appeal to all ethnic groups to exercise restraint and humility and not to indulge in acts which may result in confusion, bringing distress to a large number of our people. Any misbehavior on the part of any group of persons will give rise to a chain of unpleasant reactions. . . . I am informed that since the Liberation Army came into the Mid-West a number of civil servants have become so frightened that they have either refused to come to their places of work or reported only for a few hours and then left before the closing time. I wish to take this opportunity to appeal to all civil servants to return to work not later than 15th August 1967, and to assure them of their safety. Those, however, who fail to report on this day will be in danger of permanently losing their jobs. . . . While on the question of cooperation among the various ethnic groups in the Mid-West, I would like to stress that all tribal meetings should stop, as such meetings are not conducive to peace and mutual understanding. In order to foster cooperation among the people of the Mid-West, I propose within the next few days to invite a cross section of the people of the Mid-West to a meeting to explain to them the present situation and objectives of the Liberation Army, and I believe this will go a long way to giving them the true picture of the situation and instill confidence in the future of the Mid-West. I understand that anxiety is being expressed in some quarters about the safety of the Military Governor of the Mid-West, Brig. David Ejoor. I wish to inform you that I have personally held discussions with Brig. Ejoor and to assure you that he is in good health and is not under detention. . . . I have, therefore, today promulgated a decree setting up an interim administration in Mid-Western Nigeria. This decree has suspended the operation in Mid-Western Nigeria of the Constitution of the Federation of Nigeria, the Constitution of Mid-Western Nigeria, and other constitutional provisions applicable in Mid-Western Nigeria, except those constitutional provisions absolutely necessary for the efficient functioning of the machinery of State. All legislative and executive powers have been vested in me during the period of interim administration. In order to assist me in the task of administering MidWestern Nigeria during the interim period I propose to appoint a military administrator and an administrative council. I have also established a MidWestern Nigerian Army and a Mid-Western Nigerian Police Force, which will for the moment remain independent of the Nigerian Army, the Nigerian Police Force, the Biafran Army, or the Biafran Police Force. The Mid-Western Nigerian Army shall, however, during this interim period be part of the Liberation Army. All courts in Mid-Western Nigeria shall continue to function as usual and it may be necessary to establish a court of appeal until it becomes possible to resume [words indistinct] the Supreme Court of Nigeria. As soon as it is practicable I propose to hand over the administration of Mid-Western Nigeria in order to proceed to the war front and to complete the liberation of Nigeria. Good Night.
<|book_end|>

<|book_start|>
This was the third nightfall since he began to look for signs of the new moon. He knew it would come today but he always began his watch three days early because he must not take a risk. In this season of the year his task was not too difficult; he did not have to peer and search the sky as he might do when the rains came. Then the new moon sometimes hid itself for days behind rain clouds so that when it finally came out it was already halfgrown. And while it played its game the Chief Priest sat up every evening waiting. His obi was built differently from other mens huts. There was the usual, long threshold in front but also a shorter one on the right as you entered. The eaves on this additional entrance were cut back so that sitting on the floor Ezeulu could watch that part of the sky where the moon had its door. It was getting darker and he constantly blinked to clear his eyes of the water that formed from gazing so intently. Ezeulu did not like to think that his sight was no longer as good as it used to be and that some day he would have to rely on someone elses eyes as his grandfather had done when his sight failed. Of course he had lived to such a great age that his blindness became like an ornament on him. If Ezeulu lived to be so old he too would accept such a loss. But for the present he was as good as any young man, or better because young men were no longer what they used to be. There was one game Ezeulu never tired of playing on them. Whenever they shook hands with him he tensed his arm and put all his power into the grip, and being unprepared for it they winced and recoiled with pain. The moon he saw that day was as thin as an orphan fed grudgingly by a cruel foster-mother. He peered more closely to make sure he was not deceived by a feather of cloud. At the same time he reached nervously for his ogene. It was the same at every new moon. He was now an old man but the fear of the new moon which he felt as a little boy still hovered round him. It was true that when he became Chief Priest of Ulu the fear was often overpowered by the joy of his high office; but it was not killed. It lay on the ground in the grip of the joy. He beat his ogene GOME GOME GOME GOME . . . and immediately childrens voices took up the news on all sides. Onwa atuo! . . . onwa atuo! . . . onwa atuo! . . . He put the stick back into the iron gong and leaned it on the wall. The little children in his compound joined the rest in welcoming the moon. Obiagelis tiny voice stood out like a small ogene among drums and flutes. He could also make out the voice of his youngest son, Nwafo. The women too were in the open, talking. Moon, said the senior wife, Matefi, may your face meeting mine bring good fortune. Where is it? asked Ugoye, the younger wife. I dont see it. Or am I blind? Dont you see beyond the top of the ukwa tree? Not there. Follow my finger. Oho, I see it. Moon, may your face meeting mine bring good fortune. But how is it sitting? I dont like its posture. Why? asked Matefi. I think it sits awkwardlylike an evil moon. No, said Matefi. A bad moon does not leave anyone in doubt. Like the one under which Okuata died. Its legs were up in the air. Does the moon kill people? asked Obiageli, tugging at her mothers cloth. What have I done to this child? Do you want to strip me naked? I said does the moon kill people? It kills little girls, said Nwafo, her brother. I did not ask you, ant-hill nose. You will soon cry, long throat. The moon kills little boys The moon kills ant-hill nose The moon kills little boys . . . Obiageli turned everything into a song. Ezeulu went into his barn and took down one yam from the bamboo platform built specially for the twelve sacred yams. There were eight left. He knew there would be eight; nevertheless he counted them carefully. He had already eaten three and had the fourth in his hand. He checked the remaining ones again and went back to his obi, shutting the door of the barn carefully after him. His log fire was smouldering. He reached for a few sticks of firewood stacked in the corner, set them carefully on the fire and placed the yam, like a sacrifice, on top. As he waited for it to roast he planned the coming event in his mind. It was Oye. Tomorrow would be Afo and the next day Nkwo, the day of the great market. The festival of the Pumpkin Leaves would fall on the third Nkwo from that day. Tomorrow he would send for his assistants and tell them to announce the day to the six villages of Umuaro. Whenever Ezeulu considered the immensity of his power over the year and the crops and, therefore, over the people he wondered if it was real. It was true he named the day for the feast of the Pumpkin Leaves and for the New Yam feast; but he did not choose it. He was merely a watchman. His power was no more than the power of a child over a goat that was said to be his. As long as the goat was alive it could be his; he would find it food and take care of it. But the day it was slaughtered he would know soon enough who the real owner was. No! the Chief Priest of Ulu was more than that, must be more than that. If he should refuse to name the day there would be no festival no planting and no reaping. But could he refuse? No Chief Priest had ever refused. So it could not be done. He would not dare. Ezeulu was stung to anger by this as though his enemy had spoken it. Take away that word darehe replied to this enemy. Yes I say take it away. No man in all Umuaro can stand up and say that I dare not. The woman who will bear the man who will say it has not been born yet. But this rebuke brought only momentary satisfaction. His mind, never content with shallow satisfactions, crept again to the brinks of knowing. What kind of power was it if it would never be used? Better to say that it was not there, that it was no more than the power in the anus of the proud dog who sought to put out a furnace with his puny fart. . . . He turned the yam with a stick. His youngest son, Nwafo, now came into the obi, saluted Ezeulu by name and took his favourite position on the mud-bed at the far end, close to the shorter threshold. Although he was still only a child it looked as though the deity had already marked him out as his future Chief Priest. Even before he had learnt to speak more than a few words he had been strongly drawn to the gods ritual. It could almost be said that he already knew more about it than even the eldest. Nevertheless no one would be so rash as to say openly that Ulu would do this or do that. When the time came that Ezeulu was no longer found in his place Ulu might choose the least likely of his sons to succeed him. It had happened before. Ezeulu attended the yam very closely, rolling it over with the stick again and again. His eldest son, Edogo, came in from his own hut. Ezeulu! he saluted. E-e-i! Edogo passed through the hut into the inner compound to his sister Akuekes temporary home. Go and call Edogo, said Ezeulu to Nwafo. The two came back and sat down on the mud-bed. Ezeulu turned his yam once more before he spoke. Did I ever tell you anything about carving a deity? Edogo did not reply. Ezeulu looked in his direction but did not see him clearly because that part of the obi was in darkness. Edogo on his part saw his fathers face lit up by the fire on which he was roasting the sacred yam. Is Edogo not there? I am here. I said what did I tell you about carving the image of gods? Perhaps you did not hear my first question; perhaps I spoke with water in my mouth. You told me to avoid it. I told you that, did I? What is this story I hear thenthat you are carving an alusi for a man of Umuagu? Who told you? Who told me? Is it true or not is what I want to know, not who told me. I want to know who told you because I dont think he can tell the difference between the face of a deity and the face of a Mask. I see. You may go, my son. And if you like you may carve all the gods in Umuaro. If you hear me asking you about it again take my name and give it to a dog. What I am carving for the man of Umuagu is not. . . . It is not me you are talking to. I have finished with you. Nwafo tried in vain to make sense out of these words. When his fathers temper cooled he would ask. Then his sister, Obiageli, came in from the inner compound, saluted Ezeulu and made to sit on the mudbed. Have you finished preparing the bitter-leaf? asked Nwafo. Dont you know how to prepare bitter-leaf? Or are your fingers broken? Keep quiet there, you two. Ezeulu rolled the yam out of the fire with the stick and quickly felt it between his thumb and first finger, and was satisfied. He brought down a two-edged knife from the rafters and began to scrape off the coat of black on the roast yam. His hands were covered in soot when he had finished, and he clapped them together a few times to get them clean again. His wooden bowl was near at hand and he cut the yam into it and waited for it to cool. When he began eating Obiageli started to sing quietly to herself. She should have known by now that her father never gave out even the smallest crumbs of the yam he ate without palm oil at every new moon. But she never ceased hoping. He ate in silence. He had moved away from the fire and now sat with his back against the wall, looking outwards. As was usual with him on these occasions his mind seemed to be fixed on distant thoughts. Now and again he drank from a calabash of cold water which Nwafo had brought for him. As he took the last piece Obiageli returned to her mothers hut. Nwafo put away the wooden bowl and the calabash and stuck the knife again between the two rafters. Ezeulu rose from his goatskin and moved to the household shrine on a flat board behind the central dwarf wall at the entrance. His ikenga, about as tall as a mans forearm, its animal horn as long as the rest of its human body, jostled with faceless okposi of the ancestors black with the blood of sacrifice, and his short personal staff of ofo. Nwafos eyes picked out the special okposi which belonged to him. It had been carved for him because of the convulsions he used to have at night. They told him to call it Namesake, and he did. Gradually the convulsions had left him. Ezeulu took the ofo staff from the others and sat in front of the shrine, not astride in a mans fashion but with his legs stretched in front of him to one side of the shrine, like a woman. He held one end of the short staff in his right hand and with the other end hit the earth to punctuate his prayer: Ulu, 1 thank you for making me see another new moon. May 1 see it again and again. This household may it be healthy and prosperous. As this is the moon of planting may the six villages plant with profit. May we escape danger in the farmthe bite of a snake or the sting of the scorpion, the mighty one of the scrubland. May we not cut our shinbone with the matchet or the hoe. And let our wives bear male children. May we increase in numbers at the next counting of the villages so that we shall sacrifice to you a cow, not a chicken as we did after the last New Yam feast. May children put their fathers into the earth and not fathers their children. May good meet the face of every man and every woman. Let it come to the land of the riverain folk and to the land of the forest peoples.  He put the ofo back among the ikenga and the okposi, wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and returned to his place. Every time he prayed for Umuaro bitterness rose into his mouth, a great smouldering anger for the division which had come to the six villages and which his enemies sought to lay on his head. And for what reason? Because he had spoken the truth before the white man. But how could a man who held the holy staff of Ulu know that a thing was a lie and speak it? How could he fail to tell the story as he had heard it from his own father? Even the white man, Wintabota, understood, though he came from a land no one knew. He had called Ezeulu the only witness of truth. That was what riled his enemiesthat the white man whose father or mother no one knew should come to tell them the truth they knew but hated to hear. It was an augury of the worlds ruin. The voices of women returning from the stream broke into Ezeulus thoughts. He could not see them because of the darkness outside. The new moon having shown itself had retired again. But the night bore marks of its visit. The darkness was not impenetrable as it had been lately, but open and airy like a forest from which the undergrowth had been cut. As the women called out Ezeulu one after another he saw their vague forms and returned their greeting. They left the obi to their right and went into the inner compound through the only other entrancea high, carved door in the red, earth walls. Are these not the people I saw going to the stream before the sun went down? Yes, said Nwafo. They went to Nwangene. I see. Ezeulu had forgotten temporarily that the nearer stream, Ota, had been abandoned since the oracle announced yesterday that the enormous boulder resting on two other rocks at its source was about to fall and would take a softer pillow for its head. Until the alusi who owned the stream and whose name it bore had been placated no one would go near it. Still, Ezeulu thought, he would speak his mind to whoever brought him a late supper tonight. If they knew they had to go to Nwangene they should have set out earlier. He was tired of having his meal sent to him when other men had eaten and forgotten. Obikas great, manly voice rose louder and louder into the night air as he approached home. Even his whistling carried farther than some mens voices. He sang and whistled alternately. Obika is returning, said Nwafo. The night bird is early coming home today, said Ezeulu, at the same time. One day soon he will see Eru again, said Nwafo, referring to the apparition Obika had once seen at night. The story had been told so often that Nwafo imagined he was there. This time it will be Idemili or Ogwugwu, said Ezeulu with a smile, and Nwafo was full of happiness. About three years ago Obika had rushed into the obi one night and flung himself at his father shivering with terror. It was a dark night and rain was preparing to fall. Thunder rumbled with a deep, liquid voice and flash answered flash. What is it, my son? Ezeulu asked again and again, but Obika trembled and said nothing. What is it, Obika? asked his mother, Matefi, who had run into the obi and was now shaking worse than her son. Keep quiet there, said Ezeulu. What did you see, Obika? When he had cooled a little Obika began to tell his father what he had seen at a flash of lightning near the ugili tree between their village, Umuachala, and Umunneora. As soon as he had mentioned the place Ezeulu had known what it was. What happened when you saw It? I knew it was a spirit; my head swelled. Did he not turn into the Bush That Ruined Little Birds? On the left? His fathers confidence revived Obika. He nodded and Ezeulu nodded twice. The other women were now ranged round the door. What did he look like? Taller than any man I know. He swallowed a lump. His skin was very light . . . like . . . like . . . Was he dressed like a poor man or was it like a man of great wealth? He was dressed like a wealthy man. He had an eagles feather in his red cap. His teeth began to knock together again. Hold yourself together. You are not a woman. Had he an elephant tusk? Yes. He carried a big tusk across his shoulder. The rain had now begun to fall, at first in big drops that sounded like pebbles on the thatch. There is no cause to be afraid, my son. You have seen Eru, the Magnificent, the One that gives wealth to those who find favour with him. People sometimes see him at that place in this kind of weather. Perhaps he was returning home from a visit to Idemili or the other deities. Eru only harms those who swear falsely before his shrine. Ezeulu was carried away by his praise of the god of wealth. The way he spoke one would have thought he was the proud priest of Eru rather than Ulu who stood above Eru and all the other deities. When he likes a man wealth flows like a river into his house; his yams grow as big as human beings, his goats produce threes and his hens hatch nines. Matefis daughter, Ojiugo, brought in a bowl of foofoo and a bowl of soup, saluted her father and set them before him. Then she turned to Nwafo and said: Go to your mothers hut; she has finished cookin g. Leave the boy alone, said Ezeulu who knew that Matefi and her daughter resented his partiality for his other wifes son. Go and call your mother for me. He made no move to start eating and Ojiugo knew there was going to be trouble. She went back to her mothers hut and called her. I dont know how many times I have said in this house that I shall not eat my supper when every other man in Umuaro is retiring to sleep, he said as soon as Matefi came in. But you will not listen. To you whatever I say in this house is no more effective than the fart a dog breaks to put out a fire. ... I went all the way to Nwangene to fetch water and ... If you like you may go to Nkisa. What I am saying is that if you want that madness of yours to be cured, bring my supper at this time another day. . . . When Ojiugo came to collect the bowls she found Nwafo polishing off the soup. She waited for him to finish, full of anger. Then she gathered the bowls and went to tell her mother about it. This was not the first time or the second or third. It happened every day. Do you blame a vulture for perching over a carcass? said Matefi. What do you expect a boy to do when his mother cooks soup with locust beans for fish? She saves her money to buy ivory bracelets. But Ezeulu will never see anything wrong in what she does. If it is me then he knows what to say. Ojiugo was looking towards the other womans hut which was separated from theirs by the whole length of the compound. All she could see was the yellowish glow of the palm oil lamp between the low eaves and the threshold. There was a third hut which formed a half moon with the other two. It had belonged to Ezeulus first wife, Okuata, who died many years ago. Ojiugo hardly knew her; she only remembered she used to give a piece of fish and some locust-beans to every child who went to her hut when she was making her soup. She was the mother of Adeze, Edogo and Akueke. After her death her children lived in the hut until the girls married. Then Edogo lived there alone until he married two years ago and built a small compound of his own beside his fathers. Now Akueke had been living in the hut again since she left her husbands house. They said the man ill-treated her. But Ojiugos mother said it was a lie and that Akueke was headstrong and proud, the kind of woman who carried her fathers compound into the house of her husband. Just when Ojiugo and her mother were about to begin their meal, Obika came home singing and whistling. Bring me his bowl, said Matefi. He is early today. Obika stooped at the low eaves and came in hands first. He saluted his mother and she said Nno without any warmth. He sat down heavily on the mud-bed. Ojiugo had brought his soup bowl of fired clay and was now bringing down his foofoo from the bamboo ledge. Matefi blew into the soup bowl to remove dust and ash and ladled soup into it. Ojiugo set it before her brother and went outside to bring water in a gourd. After the first swallow Obika tilted the bowl of soup towards the light and inspected it critically. What do you call this, soup or cocoyam porridge. The women ignored him and went on with their own interrupted meal. It was clear he had drunk too much palm wine again. Obika was one of the handsomest young men in Umuaro and all the surrounding districts. His face was very finely cut and his nose stood gem, like the note of a gong. His skin was, like his fathers, the colour of terracotta. People said of him (as they always did when they saw great comeliness) that he was not born for these parts among the Igbo people of the forests; that in his previous life he must have sojourned among the riverain folk whom the Igbo called Olu. But two things spoilt Obika. He drank palm wine to excess, and he was given to sudden and fiery anger. And being as strong as rock he was always inflicting injury on others. His father who preferred him to Edogo, his quiet and brooding half-brother, nevertheless said to him often: It is praiseworthy to be brave and fearless, my son, but sometimes it is better to be a coward. We often stand in the compound of a coward to point at the ruins where a brave man used to live. The man who has never submitted to anything will soon submit to the burial mat. But for all that Ezeulu would rather have a sharp boy who broke utensils in his haste than a slow and careful snail. Not very long ago Obika had come very close indeed to committing murder. His half-sister, Akueke, often came home to say that her husband had beaten her. One early morning she came again with her face all swollen. Without waiting to hear the rest of the story Obika set out for Umuogwugwu, the village of his brother-in-law. On the way he stopped to call his friend, Ofoedu, who was never absent from the scene of a fight. As they approached Umuogwugwu Obika explained to Ofoedu that he must not help in beating Akuekes husband. Why have you called me then? asked the other, angrily. To carry your bag? There may be work for you. If Umuogwugwu people are what I take them to be they will come out in force to defend their brother. Then there will be work for you. No one in Ezeulus compound knew where Obika had gone until he returned a little before noon with Ofoedu. On their heads was Akuekes husband tied to a bed, almost dead. They set him down under the ukwa tree and dared anyone to move him. The women and the neighbours pleaded with Obika and showed him the threatening ripe fruit on the tree, as big as water pots. Yes. I put him there on purpose, to be crushed by the fruitthe beast. Eventually the commotion brought Ezeulu, who had gone into the near-by bush, hurrying home. When he saw what was happening he wailed a lament on the destruction Obika would bring to his house and ordered him to release his in-law. For three markets Ibe could barely rise from his bed. Then one evening his kinsmen came to seek satisfaction from Ezeulu. Most of them had gone out to their farms when it had all happened. For three markets and more they had waited patiently for someone to explain why their kinsman should be beaten up and carried away. What is this story we hear about Ibe? they asked. Ezeulu tried to placate them without admitting that his son had done anything seriously wrong. He called his daughter, Akueke, to stand before them. You should have seen her the day she came home. Is this how you marry women in your place? If it is your way then I say you will not marry my daughter like that. The men agreed that Ibe had stretched his arm too far, and so no one could blame Obika for defending his sister. Why do we pray to Ulu and to our ancestors to increase our numbers if not for this thing? said their leader. No one eats numbers. But if we are many nobody will dare molest us, and our daughters will hold their heads up in their husbands houses. So we do not blame Obika too much. Do I speak well? His companions answered yes and he continued. We cannot say that your son did wrong to fight for his sister. What we do not understand, however, is why a man with a penis between his legs should be carried away from his house and village. It is as if to say: You are nothing and your kinsmen can do nothing. This is the part we do not understand. We have not come with wisdom but with foolishness because a man does not go to his in-law with wisdom. We want you to say to us: You are wrong; this is how it is or that is how it is. And we shall be satisfied and go home. If someone says to us afterwards: Your kinsman was beaten up and carried away; we shall know what to reply. Our great in-law, I salute you. Ezeulu employed all his skill in speaking to pacify his in-laws. They went home happier than they came. But it was hardly likely that they would press Ibe to carry palm wine to Ezeulu and ask for his wifes return. It looked as if she would live in her fathers compound for a long time. When he finished his meal Obika joined the others in Ezeulus hut. As usual Edogo spoke for all of them. As well as Obika, Oduche and Nwafo were there also. Tomorrow is Afo, said Edogo, and we have come to find out what work you have for us. Ezeulu thought for a while as though he was unprepared for the proposal. Then he asked Obika how much of the work on his new homestead was still undone. Only the womans barn, he replied. But that could wait. There will be no cocoyam to put into it until harvest time. Nothing will wait, said Ezeulu. A new wife should not come into an unfinished homestead. I know such a thing does not trouble the present age. But as long as we are there we shall continue to point out the right way . . . Edogo, instead of working for me tomorrow take your brothers and the women to build the barn. If Obika has no shame, the rest of us have. Father, I have a word to say. It was Oduche. I am listening. Oduche cleared his throat as if he was afraid to begin. Perhaps they are forbidden to help their brothers build a barn, said Obika thickly. You are always talking like a fool, Edogo snapped at him. Has Oduche not worked as hard as yourself on your homestead? I should say harder. It is Oduche I am waiting to hear, said Ezeulu, not you two jealous wives. I am one of those they have chosen to go to Okperi tomorrow and bring the loads of our new teacher. Oduche! Father! Listen to what I shall say now. When a handshake goes beyond the elbow we know it has turned to another thing. It was I who sent you to join those people because of my friendship to the white man, Wintabota. He asked me to send one of my children to learn the ways of his people and I agreed to send you. I did not send you so that you might leave your duty in my household. Do you hear me? Go and tell the people who chose you to go to Okperi that I said no. Tell them that tomorrow is the day on which my sons and my wives and my sons wife work for me. Your people should know the custom of this land; if they dont you must tell them. Do you hear me? I hear you. Go and call your mother for me. I think it is her turn to cook tomorrow. Ezeulu often said that the dead fathers of Umuaro looking at the world from Ani-Mmo must be utterly bewildered by the ways of the new age. At no other time but now could Umuaro have taken war to Okperi in the circumstances in which they did. Who would have imagined that Umuaro would go to war so sorely divided? Who would have thought that they would disregard the warning of the priest of Ulu who originally brought the six villages together and made them what they were? But Umuaro had grown wise and strong in its own conceit and had become like the little bird, nza, who ate and drank and challenged his personal god to single combat. Umuaro challenged the deity which laid the foundation of their villages. Andwhat did they expect?he thrashed them, thrashed them enough for today and for tomorrow! In the very distant past, when lizards were still few and far between, the six villagesUmuachala, Umunneora, Umuagu, Umuezeani, Umuogwugwu and Umuisiuzolived as different peoples, and each worshipped its own deity. Then the hired soldiers of Abam used to strike in the dead of night, set fire to the houses and carry men, women and children into slavery. Things were so bad for the six villages that their leaders came together to save themselves. They hired a strong team of medicine-men to install a common deity for them. This deity which the fathers of the six villages made was called Ulu. Half of the medicine was buried at a place which became Nkwo market and the other half thrown into the stream which became Mili Ulu. The six villages then took the name of Umuaro, and the priest of Ulu became their Chief Priest. From that day they were never again beaten by an enemy. How could such a people disregard the god who founded their town and protected it? Ezeulu saw it as the ruin of the world. On the day, five years ago, when the leaders of Umuaro decided to send an emissary to Okperi with white clay for peace or new palm frond for war, Ezeulu spoke in vain. He told the men of Umuaro that Ulu would not fight an unjust war. I know, he told them, my father said this to me that when our village first came here to live the land belonged to Okperi. It was Okperi who gave us a piece of their land to live in. They also gave us their deitiestheir Udo and their Ogwugwu. But they said to our ancestorsmark my wordsthe people of Okperi said to our fathers: We give you our Udo and our Ogwugwu; but you must call the deity we give you not Udo but the son of Udo, and not Ogwugwu but the son of Ogwugwu. This is the story as I heard it from my father. If you choose to fight a man for a piece of farmland that belongs to him I shall have no hand in it. But Nwaka had carried the day. He was one of the three people in all the six villages who had taken the highest title in the land, Eru, which was called after the lord of wealth himself. Nwaka came from a long line of prosperous men and from a village which called itself first in Umuaro. They said that when the six villages first came together they offered the priesthood of Ulu to the weakest among them to ensure that none in the alliance became too powerful. Umuaro kwenu! Nwaka roared. Hem! replied the men of Umuaro. Kwenu! Hem! Kwezuenu! Hem! He began to speak almost softly in the silence he had created with his salutation. Wisdom is like a goatskin bag; every man carries his own. Knowledge of the land is also like that. Ezeulu has told us what his father told him about the olden days. We know that a father does not speak falsely to his son. But we also know that the lore of the land is beyond the knowledge of many fathers. If Ezeulu had spoken about the great deity of Umuaro which he carries and which his fathers carried before him I would have paid attention to his voice. But he speaks about events which are older than Umuaro itself. I shall not be afraid to say that neither Ezeulu nor any other in this village can tell us about these events. There were murmurs of approval and of disapproval but more of approval from the assembly of elders and men of title. Nwaka walked forward and back as he spoke; the eagle feather in his red cap and bronze band on his ankle marked him out as one of the lords of the landa man favoured by Eru, the god of riches. My father told me a different story. He told me that Okperi people were wanderers. He told me three or four different places where they sojourned for a while and moved on again. They were driven away by Umuofia, then by Abame and Aninta. Would they go today and claim all those sites? Would they have laid claim on our farmland in the days before the white man turned us upside down? Elders and Ndichie of Umuaro, let everyone return to his house if we have no heart in the fight. We shall not be the first people who abandoned their farmland or even their homestead to avoid war. But let us not tell ourselves or our children that we did it because the land belonged to other people. Let us rather tell them that their fathers did not choose to fight. Let us tell them also that we marry the daughters of Okperi and their men marry our daughters, and that where there is this mingling men often lose the heart to fight. Umuaro Kwenu! Hem! Kwezuenu! Hem! I salute you all. The long uproar that followed was largely of approbation. Nwaka had totally destroyed Ezeulus speech. The last glancing blow which killed it was the hint that the Chief Priests mother had been a daughter of Okperi. The assembly broke up into numerous little groups of people talking to those who sat nearest to them. One man said that Ezeulu had forgotten whether it was his father or his mother who told him about the farmland. Speaker after speaker rose and spoke to the assembly until it was clear that all the six villages stood behind Nwaka. Ezeulu was not the only man of Umuaro whose mother had come from Okperi. But none of the others dared go to his support. In fact one of them, Akukalia, whose language never wandered far from kill and despoil, was so fiery that he was chosen to carry the white clay and the new palm frond to his motherland, Okperi. The last man to speak that day was the oldest man from Akukalias village. His voice was now shaky but his salute to the assembly was heard clearly in all corners of the Nkwo market place. The men of Umuaro responded to his great effort with the loudest Hem! of the day. He said quietly that he must rest to recover his breath, and those who heard laughed. I want to speak to the man we are sending to Okperi. It is now a long time since we fought a war and many of you may not remember the custom. I am not saying that Akukalia needs to be reminded. But I am an old man, and an old man is there to talk. If the lizard of the homestead should neglect to do the things for which its kind is known, it will be mistaken for the lizard of the farmland. From the way Akukalia spoke I saw that he was in great anger. It is right that he should feel like that. But we are not sending him to his motherland to fight. We are sending you, Akukalia, to place the choice of war or peace before them. Do I speak for Umuaro? They gave him power to carry on. We do not want Okperi to choose war; nobody eats war. If they choose peace we shall rejoice. But whatever they say you are not to dispute with them. Your duty is to bring word back to us. We all know you are a fearless man but while you are there put your fearlessness in your bag. If the young men who will go with you talk with too loud a voice it shall be your duty to cover their fault. I have in my younger days gone on such errands and know the temptations too well. I salute you. Ezeulu who had taken in everything with a sad smile now sprang to his feet like one stung in the buttocks by a black ant. Umuaro Kwenu! he cried. Hem! I salute you all. It was like the salute of an enraged Mask. When an adult is in the house the she-goat is not left to suffer the pains of parturition on its tether. That is what our ancestors have said. But what have we seen here today? We have seen people speak because they are afraid to be called cowards. Others have spoken the way they spoke because they are hungry for war. Let us leave all that aside. If in truth the farmland is ours, Ulu will fight on our side. But if it is not we shall know soon enough. I would not have spoken again today if I had not seen adults in the house neglecting their duty. Ogbuefi Egonwanne, as one of the three oldest men in Umuaro should have reminded us that our fathers did not fight a war of blame. But instead of that he wants to teach our emissary how to carry fire and water in the same mouth. Have we not heard that a boy sent by his father to steal does not go stealthily but breaks the door with his feet? Why does Egonwanne trouble himself about small things when big ones are overlooked? We want war. How Akukalia speaks to his mothers people is a small thing. He can spit into their face if he likes. When we hear a house has fallen do we ask if the ceiling fell with it? I salute you all. Akukalia and his two companions set out for Okperi at cock-crow on the following day. In his goatskin bag he carried a lump of white chalk and a few yellow palm fronds cut from the summit of the tree before they had unfurled to the sun. Each man also carried a sheathed matchet. The day was Eke, and before long Akukalia and his companions began to pass women from all the neighbouring villages on their way to the famous Eke Okperi market. They were mostly women from Elumelu and Abame who made the best pots in all the surrounding country. Everyone carried a towering load of five or six or even more big water pots held together with a net of ropes on a long basket, and seemed in the half light like a spirit with a fantastic head. As the men of Umuaro passed company after company of these market women they talked about the great Eke market in Okperi to which folk from every part of Igbo and Olu went. It is the result of an ancient medicine, Akukalia explained. My mothers people are great medicine-men. There was pride in his voice. At first Eke was a very small market. Other markets in the neighbourhood were drawing it dry. Then one day the men of Okperi made a powerful deity and placed their market in its care. From that day Eke grew and grew until it became the biggest market in these parts. This deity which is called Nwanyieke is an old woman. Every Eke day before cock-crow she appears in the market place with a broom in her right hand and dances round the vast open space beckoning with her broom in all directions of the earth and drawing folk from every land. That is why people will not come near the market before cock-crow; if they did they would see the ancient lady in her task. They tell the same story of the Nkwo market beside the great river at Umuru, said one of Akukalias companions. There the medicine has worked so well that the market no longer assembles only on Nkwo days. Umuru is no match for my mothers people in medicine, said Akukalia. Their market has grown because the white man took his merchandise there. Why did he take his merchandise there, asked the other man, if not because of their medicine? The old woman of the market has swept the world with her broom, even the land of the white men where they say the sun never shines. Is it true that one of their woman in Umuru went outside without the white hat and melted like sleeping palm oil in the sun? asked the other companion. I have also heard it, said Akukalia. But many lies are told about the white man. It was once said that he had no toes. As the sun rose the men came to the disputed farmland. It had not been cultivated for many years and was thick with browned spear grass. I remember coming with my father to this very place to cut grass for our thatches, said Akukalia. It is a thing of surprise to me that my mothers people are claiming it today. It is all due to the white man who says, like an elder to two fighting children: You will not fight while I am around. And so the younger and weaker of the two begins to swell himself up and to boast. You have spoken the truth, said Akukalia. Things like this would never have happened when I was a young man, to say nothing of the days of my father. I remember all this very well, he waved over the land. That ebenebe tree over there was once hit by thunder, and people cutting thatch under it were hurled away in every direction. What you should ask them, said the other companion who had spoken very little since they set out, what they should tell us is why, if the land was indeed theirs, why they let us farm it and cut thatch from it for generation after generation, until the white man came and reminded them. It is not our mission to ask them any question, except the one question which Umuaro wants them to answer, said Akukalia. And I think I should remind you again to hold your tongues in your hand when we get there and leave the talking to me. They are very difficult people; my mother was no exception. But I know what they know. If a man of Okperi says to you come, he means run away with all your strength. If you are not used to their ways you may sit with them from cock-crow until roosting-time and join in their talk and their food, but all the while you will be floating on the surface of the water. So leave them to me because when a man of cunning dies a man of cunning buries him. The three emissaries entered Okperi about the time when most people finished their morning meal. They made straight for the compound of Uduezue, the nearest living relation to Akukalias mother. Perhaps it was the mens unsmiling faces that told Uduezue, or maybe Okperi was not altogether unprepared for the mission from Umuaro. Nevertheless Uduezue asked them about their people at home. They are well, replied Akukalia impatiently. We have an urgent mission which we must give to the rulers of Okperi at once. True? asked Uduezue. I was saying to myself: What could bring my son and his people all this way so early? If my sister, your mother, were still alive, I would have thought that something had happened to her. He paused for a very little while. An important mission; yes. We have a saying that a toad does not run in the day unless something is after it. I do not want to delay your mission, but I must offer you a piece of kolanut. He made to rise. Do not worry yourself. Perhaps we shall return after our mission. It is a big load on our head, and until we put it down we cannot understand anything we are told. I know what it is like. Here is a piece of white clay then. Let me agree with you and leave the kolanut until you return. But the men declined even to draw lines on the floor with the clay. After that there was nothing else to say. They had rebuffed the token of goodwill between host and guest, their mission must indeed be grave. Uduezue went into his inner compound and soon returned with his goatskin bag and sheathed matchet. I shall take you to the man who will receive your message, he said. He led the way and the others followed silently. They passed an ever-thickening crowd of market people. As the planting season was near many of them carried long baskets of seed-yams. Some of the men carried goats also in long baskets. But now and again there was a man clutching a fowl; such a man never trod the earth firmly, especially when he was a man who had known better times. Many of the women talked boisterously as they went; the silent ones were those who had come from far away and had exhausted themselves. Akukalia thought he recognized some of the towering headloads of water pots they had left behind on their way. Akukalia had not visited his mothers land for about three years and he now felt strangely tender towards it. When as a little boy he had first come here with his mother he had wondered why the earth and sand looked white instead of red-brown as in Umuaro. His mother had told him the reason was that in Okperi people washed every day and were clean while in Umuaro they never touched water for the whole four days of the week. His mother was very harsh to him and very quarrelsome, but now Akukalia felt tender even towards her. Uduezue took his three visitors to the house of Otikpo, the towncrier of Okperi. He was in his obi preparing seed-yams for the market. He rose to greet his visitors. He called Uduezue by his name and title and called Akukalia Son of our Daughter. He merely shook hands with the other two whom he did not know. Otikpo was very tall and of spare frame. He still looked like the great runner he had been in his youth. He went into an inner room and returned with a rolled mat which he spread on the mud-bed for his visitors. A little girl came in from the inner compound calling, father, father. Go away, Ogbanje, he said. Dont you see I have strangers? Nweke slapped me. I shall whip him later. Go and tell him I shall whip him. Otikpo, let us go outside and whisper together, said Uduezue. They did not stay very long. When they came back Otikpo brought a kolanut in a wooden bowl. Akukalia thanked him but said that he and his companions carried such heavy loads on their heads that they could neither eat nor drink until the burden was set down. True? asked Otikpo. Can this burden you speak of come down before me and Uduezue, or does it require the elders of Okperi? It requires the elders. Then you have come at a bad time. Everybody in Igboland knows that Okperi people do not have other business on their Eke day. You should have come yesterday or the day before, or tomorrow or the day after. Son of our Daughter, you should know our habits. Your habits are not different from the habits of other people, said Akukalia. But our mission could not wait. True? Otikpo went outside and raising his voice called his neighbour, Ebo, and came in again. The mission could not wait. What shall we do now? I think you should sleep in Okperi today and see the elders tomorrow. Ebo came in and saluted generally. He was surprised to see so many people, and was temporarily at a loss. Then he began to shake hands all round, but when Akukalias turn came he refused to take Ebos hand. Sit down, Ebo, said Otikpo. Akukalia has a message for Okperi which forbids him to eat kolanut or shake hands. He wants to see the elders and I have told him it is not possible today. Why did they choose today to bring their message? Have they no market where they come from? If that is all you are calling me for I must go back and prepare for market. Our message cannot wait, I have said that before. I have not yet heard of a message that could not wait. Or have you brought us news that Chukwu, the high god, is about to remove the foot that holds the world? If not then you must know that Eke Okperi does not break up because three men have come to town. If you listen carefully even now you can hear its voice; and it is not even half full yet. When it is full you can hear it from Umuda. Do you think a market like that will stop to hear your message? He sat down for a while; nobody else spoke. You can now see, Son of our Daughter, that we cannot get our elders together before tomorrow, said Otikpo. If war came suddenly to your town how do you call your men together, Father of my Mother? Do you wait till tomorrow? Do you not beat your ikolo? Ebo and Otikpo burst into laughter. The three men from Umuaro exchanged glances. Akukalias face began to look dangerous. Uduezue sat as he had done since they first came in, his chin in his left hand. Different people have different customs, said Otikpo after his laugh, In Okperi it is not our custom to welcome strangers to our market with the ikolo.  Are you telling us, Father of my Mother, that you regard us as market women? I have borne your insults patiently. Let me remind you that my name is Okeke Akukalia of Umuaro. Ooh, of Umuaro, said Ebo, still smarting from the rebuffed handshake. I am happy you have said of Umuaro. The name of this town is Okperi. Go back to your house, shouted Akukalia, or I will make you eat shit. If you want to shout like a castrated bull you must wait until you return to Umuaro. I have told you this place is called Okperi. Perhaps it was deliberate, perhaps accidental. But Ebo had just said the one thing that nobody should ever have told Akukalia who was impotent and whose two wives were secretly given to other men to bear his children. The ensuing fight was grim. Ebo was no match for Akukalia and soon had a broken head, streaming with blood. Maddened by pain and shame he made for his house to get a matchet. Women and children from all the near-by compounds were now out, some of them screaming with fright. Passers-by also rushed in, making futile motions of intervention. What happened next was the work of Ekwensu, the bringer of evil. Akukalia rushed after Ebo, went into the obi, took the ikenga from his shrine, rushed outside again and, while everyone stood aghast, split it in two. Ebo was last to see the abomination. He had been struggling with Otikpo who wanted to take the matchet from him and so prevent bloodshed. But when the crowd saw what Akukalia had done they called on Otikpo to leave the man alone. The two men came out of the hut together. Ebo rushed towards Akukalia and then seeing what he had done stopped dead. He did not know, for one brief moment, whether he was awake or dreaming. He rubbed his eyes with the back of his left hand. Akukalia stood in front of him. The two pieces of his ikenga lay where their violator had kicked them in the dust. Move another step if you call yourself a man. Yes I did it. What can you do? So it was true. Still Ebo turned round and went into his obi. At his shrine he knelt down to have a close look. Yes, the gap where his ikenga, the strength of his right arm, had stood stared back at himan empty patch, without dust, on the wooden board. Nna doh! Nna doh! he wept, calling on his dead father to come to his aid. Then he got up and went into his sleeping-room. He was there a little while before Otikpo, thinking he might be doing violence to himself, rushed into the room to see. But it was too late. Ebo pushed him aside and came into the obi with his loaded gun. At the threshold he knelt down and aimed. Akukalia, seeing the danger, dashed forward. Although the bullet had caught him in the chest he continued running with his matchet held high until he fell at the threshold, his face hitting the low thatch before he went down. When the body was brought home to Umuaro everyone was stunned. It had never happened before that an emissary of Umuaro was killed abroad. But after the first shock people began to say that their clansman had done an unforgivable thing. Let us put ourselves in the place of the man he made a corpse before his own eyes, they said. Who would bear such a thing? What propitiation or sacrifice would atone for such sacrilege? How would the victim set about putting himself right again with his fathers unless he could say to them: Rest, for the man that did it has paid with his head? Nothing short of that would have been adequate. Umuaro might have left the matter there, and perhaps the whole land dispute with it as Ekwensu seemed to have taken a hand in it. But one small thing worried them. It was small but at the same time it was very great. Why had Okperi not deigned to send a message to Umuaro to say this was what happened and that was what happened? Everyone agreed that the man who killed Akukalia had been sorely provoked. It was also true that Akukalia was not only a son of Umuaro; he was also the son of a daughter of Okperi, and what had happened might be likened to he-goats head dropping into he-goats bag. Yet when a man was killed something had to be said, some explanation given. That Okperi had not cared to say anything beyond returning the corpse was a mark of the contempt in which they now held Umuaro. And that could not be overlooked. Four days after Akukalias death criers went through the six villages at nightfall. The assembly in the morning was very solemn. Almost everyone who spoke said that although it was not right to blame a corpse it must be admitted that their kinsman did a great wrong. Many of them, especially the older men, asked Umuaro to let the matter drop. But there were others who, as the saying was, pulled out their hair and chewed it. They swore that they would not live and see Umuaro spat upon. They were, as before, led by Nwaka. He spoke with his usual eloquence and stirred many hearts. Ezeulu did not speak until the last. He saluted Umuaro quietly and with great sadness. Umuaro kwenu! Hem! Umuaro obodonesi kwenu! Hem! Kwezuenu! Hem! The reed we were blowing is now crushed. When I spoke two markets ago in this very place I used the proverb of the she-goat. I was then talking to Ogbuefi Egonwanne who was the adult in the house. I told him that he should have spoken up against what we were planning, instead of which he put a piece of live coal into the childs palm and ask him to carry it with care. We all have seen with what care he carried it. I was not then talking to Egonwanne alone but to all the elders here who left what they should have done and did another, who were in the house and yet the she-goat suffered in her parturition. Once there was a great wrestler whose back had never known the ground. He wrestled from village to village until he had thrown every man in the world. Then he decided that he must go and wrestle in the land of the spirits, and become champion there as well. He went, and beat every spirit that came forward. Some had seven heads, some ten; but he beat them all. His companion who sang his praise on the flute begged him to come away, but he would not, his blood was roused, his ear nailed up. Rather than heed the call to go home he gave a challenge to the spirits to bring out their best and strongest wrestler. So they sent him his personal god, a little wiry spirit who seized him with one hand and smashed him on the stony earth. Men of Umuaro, why do you think our fathers told us this story? They told it because they wanted to teach us that no matter how strong or great a man was he should never challenge his chi. This is what our kinsman didhe challenged his chi. We were his flute player, but we did not plead with him to come away from death. Where is he today? The fly that has no one to advise it follows the corpse into the grave. But let us leave Akukalia aside; he has gone the way his chi ordained. But let the slave who sees another cast into a shallow grave know that he will be buried in the same way when his day comes. Umuaro is today challenging its chi. Is there any man or woman in Umuaro who does not know Ulu, the deity that destroys a man when his life is sweetest to him? Some people are still talking of carrying war to Okperi. Do they think that Ulu will fight in blame? Today the world is spoilt and there is no longer head or tail in anything that is done. But Ulu is not spoilt with it. If you go to war to avenge a man who passed shit on the head of his mothers father, Ulu will not follow you to be soiled in the corruption. Umuaro, I salute you. The meeting ended in confusion. Umuaro was divided in two. Many people gathered round Ezeulu and said they stood with him. But there were others who went with Nwaka. That night he held another meeting with them in his compound and they agreed that three or four Okperi heads must fall to settle the matter. Nwaka ensured that no one came to that night meeting from Ezeulus village, Umuachala. He held up his palm-oil lamp against the face of any who came to see him clearly. Altogether he sent fifteen people away. Nwaka began by telling the assembly that Umuaro must not allow itself to be led by the Chief Priest of Ulu. My father did not tell me that before Umuaro went to war it took leave from the priest of Ulu, he said. The man who carries a deity is not a king. He is there to perform his gods ritual and to carry sacrifice to him. But I have been watching this Ezeulu for many years. He is a man of ambition; he wants to be king, priest, diviner, all. His father, they said, was like that too. But Umuaro showed him that Igbo people knew no kings. The time has come to tell his son also. We have no quarrel with Ulu. He is still our protector, even though we no longer fear Abam warriors at night. But I will not see with these eyes of mine his priest making himself lord over us. My father told me many things, but he did not tell me that Ezeulu was king in Umuaro. Who is he, anyway? Does anybody here enter his compound through the mans gate? If Umuaro decided to have a king we know where he would come from. Since when did Umuachala become head of the six villages? We all know that it was jealousy among the big villages that made them give the priesthood to the weakest. We shall fight for our farmland and for the contempt Okperi has poured on us. Let us not listen to anyone trying to frighten us with the name of Ulu. If a man says yes his chi also says yes. And we have all heard how the people of Aninta dealt with their deity when he failed them. Did they not carry him to the boundary between them and their neighbours and set fire on him? I salute you. The war was waged from one Afo to the next. On the day it began Umuaro killed two men of Okperi. The next day was Nkwo, and so there was no fighting. On the two following days, Eke and Oye, the fighting grew fierce. Umuaro killed four men and Okperi replied with three, one of the three being Akukalias brother, Okoye. The next day, Afo, saw the war brought to a sudden close. The white man, Wintabota, brought soldiers to Umuaro and stopped it. The story of what these soldiers did in Abame was still told with fear, and so Umuaro made no effort to resist but laid down their arms. Although they were not yet satisfied they could say without shame that Akukalias death had been avenged, that they had provided him with three men on whom to rest his head. It was also a good thing perhaps that the war was stopped. The death of Akukalia and his brother in one and the same dispute showed that Ekwensus hand was in it. The white man, not satisfied that he had stopped the war, had gathered all the guns in Umuaro and asked the soldiers to break them in the face of all, except three or four which he carried away. Afterwards he sat in judgement over Umuaro and Okperi and gave the disputed land to Okperi. Captain T. K. Winterbottom stood at the veranda of his bungalow on Government Hill to watch the riot of the years first rain. For the past month or two the heat had been building up to an unbearable pitch. The grass had long been burnt out, and the leaves of the more hardy trees had taken on the red and brown earth colour of the country. There was only two hours respite in the morning before the country turned into a furnace and perspiration came down in little streams from the head and neck. The most exasperating was the little stream that always coursed down behind the ear like a fly, walking. There was another moment of temporary relief at sundown when a cool wind blew. But this treacherous beguiling wind was the great danger of Africa. The unwary European who bared himself to it received the death-kiss. Captain Winterbottom had not known real sleep since the dry, cool harmattan wind stopped abruptly in December; and it was now midFebruary. He had grown pale and thin, and in spite of the heat his feet often felt cold. Every morning after the bath which he would have preferred cold but must have hot to stay alive (since Africa never spared those who did what they liked instead of what they had to do), he looked into the mirror and saw his gums getting whiter and whiter. Perhaps another bout of fever was on the way. At night he had to imprison himself inside a mosquito-net which shut out whatever air movement there was outside. His bedclothes were sodden and his head formed a waterlogged basin on the pillow. After the first stretch of unrestful sleep he would lie awake, tossing about until he was caught in the distant throb of drums. He would wonder what unspeakable rites went on in the forest at night, or was it the heart-beat of the African darkness? Then one night he was terrified when it suddenly occurred to him that no matter where he lay awake at night in Nigeria the beating of the drums came with the same constancy and from the same elusive distance. Could it be that the throbbing came from his own heat-stricken brain? He attempted to smile it off but the skin on his face felt too tight. This dear old land of waking nightmares! Fifteen years ago Winterbottom might have been so depressed by the climate and the food as to have doubts about service in Nigeria. But he was now a hardened coaster, and although the climate still made him irritable and limp, he would not now exchange the life for the comfort of Europe. His strong belief in the value of the British mission in Africa was, strangely enough, strengthened during the Cameroon campaign of 1916 when he fought against the Germans. That was how he had got the title of captain but unlike many other colonial administrators who also saw active service in the Cameroon he carried his into peacetime. Although the first rain was overdue, when it did come it took people by surprise. Throughout the day the sun had breathed fire as usual and the world had lain prostrate with shock. The birds which sang in the morning were silenced. The air stood in one spot, vibrating with the heat; the trees hung limp. Then without any sign a great wind arose and the sky darkened. Dust and flying leaves filled the air. Palm trees and coconut trees swayed from their waists; their tops gave them the look of giants fleeing against the wind, their long hair streaming behind them. Winterbottoms servant, John, rushed around closing doors and windows and picking up papers and photographs from the floor. Sharp Arroiv of God 31 and dry barks of thunder broke into the tumult. The world which had dozed for months was suddenly full of life again, smelling of new leaves to be born. Winterbottom, at the railing of his veranda, was also a changed man. He let the dust blow into his eyes and for once envied the native children running around naked and singing to the coming rain. What are they saying? he asked John, who was now carrying in the deck-chairs. Dem talk say make rain come quick quick. Four other children ran in from the direction of the Boys quarters to join the rest on Winterbottoms lawn which was the only space big enough for their play. Are all these your pickin, John? There was something like envy in his voice. No, sir, said John, putting down the chair and pointing. My pickin na dat two wey de run yonder and dat yellow gal. Di oder two na Cook im pickin. Di oder one yonder na Gardener him brodder pickin. They had to shout to be heard. The sky was now covered with restless, black clouds except at the far horizon where a narrow rim of lightness persisted. Long streaks of lightning cracked the clouds angrily and impatiently only to be wiped off again. When it began the rain fell like large pebbles. The children intensified their singing as the first frozen drops hit them. Sometimes it was quite painful, but it only made them laugh the more. They scrambled to pick up the frozen drops and throw them into their mouths before they melted. It rained for almost an hour and stopped clean. The trees were washed green and the leaves fluttered happily. Winterbottom looked at his watch and it was almost six. In the excitement of the years first rain he had forgotten his tea and biscuits which John had brought in just before five; he picked up a biscuit and began to munch. Then he remembered that Clarke was coming to dinner and went to the kitchen to see what Cook was doing. Okperi was not a very big station. There were only five Europeans living on Government Hill: Captain Winterbottom, Mr. Clarke, Roberts, Wade and Wright. Captain Winterbottom was the District Officer. The Union Jack flying in front of his bungalow declared he was the 32 CHINUA ACHEBE Kings representative in the district. He took the salute on Empire Day at the march past of all the school-children in the areaone of the few occasions when he wore his white uniform and sword. Mr. Clarke was his Assistant District Officer. He was only four weeks old in the station, and had come to replace poor John Macmillan, who had died from cerebral malaria. The other Europeans did not belong to the Administration. Roberts was an Assistant Superintendent of Police in charge of the local detachment. Wade was in charge of the prison; he was also called Assistant Superintendent. The other man, Wright, did not really belong to the station. He was a Public Works Department man supervising the new road to Umuaro. Captain Winterbottom had already had cause to talk to him seriously about his behaviour, especially with native women. It was absolutely imperative, he told him, that every European in Nigeria, particularly those in such a lonely outpost as Okperi, should not lower themselves in the eyes of the natives. In such a place the District Officer was something of a school prefect, and Captain Winterbottom was determined to do his duty. He would go as far as barring Wright from the club unless he showed a marked change. The club was the old Regimental Mess the army left behind when their work of pacification was done in these parts and then moved on. It was a small wooden bungalow containing the mess-room, ante-room, and a veranda. At present the mess-room was used as bar and lounge, the ante-room as library where members saw the papers of two or three months ago and read Reuters telegramsten words twice a week. Tony Clarke was dressed for dinner, although he still had more than an hour to go. Dressing for dinner was very irksome in the heat, but he had been told by many experienced coasters that it was quite imperative. They said it was a general tonic which one must take if one was to survive in this demoralising country. For to neglect it could become the first step on the slippery gradient of ever profounder repudiations. Today was quite pleasant because the rain had brought some coolness. But there had been days when Tony Clarke had foregone a proper dinner to avoid the torment of a starched shirt and tie. He was now reading the final chapter of The Pacification of the Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger, by George Allen, which Captain Winterbottom had lent him. From time to time he glanced at his gold watch, a present Arrow of God 33 from his father when he left home for service in Nigeria or, as George Allen would have said, to answer the call. He had now had the book for over a fortnight and must finish and take it back this evening. One of the ways in which the tropics were affecting him was the speed of his reading, although in its own right the book was also pretty dull; much too smug for his taste. But he was now finding the last few paragraphs quite stirring. The chapter was headed THE CALL. For those seeking but a comfortable living and a quiet occupation Nigeria is closed and will be closed until the earth has lost some of its deadly fertility and until the people live under something like sanitary conditions. But for those in search of a strenuous life, for those who can deal with men as others deal with material, who can grasp great situations, coax events, shape destinies and ride on the crest of the wave of time Nigeria is holding out her hands. For the men who in India have made the Briton the law-maker, the organizer, the engineer of the world this new, old land has great rewards and honourable work. I know we can find the men. Our mothers do not draw us with nervous grip back to the fireside of boyhood, back into the home circle, back to the purposeless sports of middle life; it is our greatest pride that they doalbeit tearfullysend us fearless and erect, to lead the backward races into line. Surely we are the people! Shall it be the Little Englander for whom the Norman fought the Saxon on his field? Was it for him the archers bled at Crecy and Poitiers, or Cromwell drilled his men? Is it only for the desk our youngsters read of Drake and Frobisher, of Nelson, Clive and men like Mungo Park? Is it for the counting-house they learn of Carthage, Greece and Rome? No, no; a thousand times no! The British race will take its place, the British blood will tell. Son after son will leave the Mersey, strong in the will of his parents today, stronger in the deed of his fathers in the past, braving the climate, taking the risks, playing his best in the game of life. Thats rather good, said Mr. Clarke, and glanced at his watch again. Captain Winterbottoms bungalow was only two minutes walk away, so there was plenty of time. Before he came to Okperi Clarke had spend two months at Headquarters being broken in, and he would never forget the day he was invited to dinner by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor. For some curious reason he had imagined that the time was eight oclock and arrived at Government House on the dot. The glittering Reception Hall was empty and Clarke would have gone into the front garden to wait had not one of the stewards come forward and offered him a drink. He sat uneasily on the edge of a chair with a glass of sherry in his hand, wondering whether he should not even now withdraw into the shade of one of the trees in the garden 34 CHINUA ACHEBE until the other guests arrived. Then it was too late. Someone was descending the stairs at a run, whistling uninhibitedly. Clarke sprang to his feet. His Honour glowered at him for a brief moment before he came forward to shake hands. Clarke introduced himself and was about to apologize. But H.H. gave him no chance. I was under the impression that dinner was at eight-fifteen. Just then his aide-de-camp came in and, seeing a guest, looked worried, shook his watch and listened for its ticking. Dont worry, John. Come and meet Mr. Clarke who came a little early. He left the two together and went upstairs again. Throughout the dinner he never spoke to Clarke again. Very soon other guests began to arrive. But they were all very senior people and took no interest at all in poor Clarke. Two of them had their wives; the rest including H.H. were either unmarried or had wisely left their wives at home in England. The worst moment for Clarke came when H.H. led his guests into the Dining-Room and Clarke could not find his name anywhere. The rest took no notice; as soon as H.H. was seated they all took their places. After what looked to Clarke like hours the A.D.C. noticed him and sent one of the stewards to get a chair. Then he must have had second thoughts, for he stood up and offered his own place to Clarke. Captain Winterbottom was drinking brandy and ginger ale when Tony Clarke arrived. Its nice and cool today, thank God. Yes, the first rain was pretty much overdue, said Captain Winterbottom. I had no idea what a tropical storm looked like. It will be cooler now, I suppose. Well, not exactly. It will be fairly cool for a couple of days thats all. You see, the rainy season doesnt really begin until May or even June. Do sit down. Did you enjoy that? Yes, thank you very much. I found it most interesting. Perhaps Mr. Allen is a trifle too dogmatic. One could even say a little smug. Captain Winterbottoms Small Boy, Boniface, came forward with a silver tray. What Massa go drink? Arrow of God 35 I wonder. Why not try some Old Coaster? Whats that? Brandy and ginger ale. Right. Thats fine. For the first time he looked at the Small Boy in his starched white uniform and saw that he was remarkably handsome. Captain Winterbottom seemed to read his thought. Hes a fine specimen, isnt he? Hes been with me four years. He was a little boy of about thirteenby my own calculation, theyve no idea of yearswhen I took him on. He was absolutely raw. When you say theyve no idea of years . . . They understand seasons, I dont mean that. But ask a man how old he is and he doesnt begin to have an idea. The Small Boy came back with the drink. Thank you very much, said Mr. Clarke as he took it. Yessah. Thousands of flying ants swarmed around the tilley lamp on a stand at the far corner. They soon lost their wings and crawled on the floor. Clarke watched them with great interest, and then asked if they stung. No, they are quite harmless. They are driven out of the ground by the rain. The crawling ones were sometimes hooked up in twos at their tails. It was rather interesting what you said about Allen. A little smug, I think you said. That was the impression I hadsometimes. He doesnt allow, for instance, for there being anything of value in native institutions. He might really be one of the missionary people. I see you are one of the progressive ones. When youve been here as long as Allen was and understood the native a little more you might begin to see things in a slightly different light. If you saw, as I did, a man buried alive up to his neck with a piece of roast yam on his head to attract vultures you know . . . Well, never mind. We British are a curious bunch, doing everything half-heartedly. Look at the French. They are not ashamed to teach their culture to backward races under their charge. Their attitude to the native ruler is clear. They say to him: This land has belonged to you because you have been strong enough 36 CHINUA ACHEBE to hold it. By the same token it now belongs to us. If you are not satisfied come out and fight us. What do we British do? We flounder from one expedient to its opposite. We do not only promise to secure old savage tyrants on their thronesor more likely filthy animal skins we not only do that, but we now go out of our way to invent chiefs where there were none before. They make me sick. He swallowed what was left in his glass and shouted to Boniface for another glass. I wouldnt really mind if this dithering was left to old fossils in Lagos, but when young Political Officers get infected I just give up. If someone is positive we call him smug. Mr. Clarke admitted that whatever judgement he made was made in ignorance and that he was open to correction. Boniface! Yessah. Bring another drink for Mr. Clarke. No really I think Ive had . . . Nonsense. Dinner wont be ready for another hour at least. Try something else if you prefer. Whisky? Clarke accepted another brandy with great reluctance. Thats a very interesting collection of firearms. Mr. Clarke had been desperately searching for a new subject. Then luckily he lit on a collection of quaint-looking guns arranged like trophies near the low window of the living-room. Are they native guns? He had stumbled on a redeeming theme. Captain Winterbottom was transformed. Those guns have a long and interesting history. The people of Okperi and their neighbours, Umuaro, are great enemies. Or they were before I came into the story. A big savage war had broken out between them over a piece of land. This feud was made worse by the fact that Okperi welcomed missionaries and government while Umuaro, on the other hand, has remained backward. It was only in the last four or five years that any kind of impression has been made there. I think I can say with all modesty that this change came about after I had gathered and publicly destroyed all firearms in the place except, of course, this collection here. You will be going there frequently on tour. If you hear anyone talking about Otiji-Egbe, you know they are talking about me. Otiji-Egbe means Breaker of Guns. I am even told Arrow of God 37 that all children born in that year belong to a new age-grade of the Breaking of the Guns/' Thats most interesting. How far is this other village, Umuaro? Clarke knew instinctively that the more ignorant he seemed the better. Oh, about six miles, not more. But to the native thats a foreign country. Unlike some of the more advanced tribes in Northern Nigeria, and to some extent Western Nigeria, the Ibos never developed any kind of central authority. Thats what our headquarters people fail to appreciate. Yes, I see. This war between Umuaro and Okperi began in a rather interesting way. I went into it in considerable detail . . . Boniface! How are you doing, Mr. Clarke? Fine? You ought to drink more; its good for malaria. ... As I was saying, this war started because a man from Umuaro went to visit a friend in Okperi one fine morning and after hed had one or two gallons of palm wineits quite incredible how much of that dreadful stuff they can tuck awayanyhow, this man from Umuaro having drunk his friends palm wine reached for his ikenga and split it in two. I may explain that ikenga is the most important fetish in the Ibo mans arsenal, so to speak. It represents his ancestors to whom he must make daily sacrifice. When he dies it is split in two; one half is buried with him and the other half is thrown away. So you can see the implication of what our friend from Umuaro did in splitting his hosts fetish. This was, of course, the greatest sacrilege. The outraged host reached for his gun and blew the other fellows head off. And so a regular war developed between the two villages, until I stepped in. I went into the question of the ownership of the piece of land which was the remote cause of all the unrest and found without any shade of doubt that it belonged to Okperi. I should mention that every witness who testified before mefrom both sides without exceptionperjured themselves. One thing you must remember in dealing with natives is that like children they are great liars. They dont lie simply to get out of trouble. Sometimes they would spoil a good case by a pointless lie. Only one mana kind of priest-king in Umuaro witnessed against his own people. I have not found out what it was, but I think he must have had some pretty fierce tabu working on him. But he was a most impressive figure of a man. He was very light in complexion, almost red. One finds people like that now and again 38 CHINUA ACHEBE among the Ibos. I have a theory that the Ibos in the distant past assimilated a small non-negroid tribe of the same complexion as the Red Indians. Winterbottom stood up. Now what about some dinner, he said. 4 In the five years since the white man broke the guns of Umuaro the enmity between Ezeulu and Nwaka of Umunneora grew and grew until they were at the point which Umuaro people called kill and take the head. As was to be expected this enmity spread through their two villages and before long there were several stories of poisoning. From then on few people from the one village would touch palm wine or kolanut which had passed through the hands of a man from the other. Nwaka was known for speaking his mind; he never paused to bite his words. But many people trembled for him that night in his compound when he had all but threatened Ulu by reminding him of the fate of another deity that failed his people. It was true that the people of Aninta burnt one of their deities and drove away his priest. But it did not follow that Ulu would also allow himself to be bullied and disgraced. Perhaps Nwaka counted on the protection of the personal god of his village. But the elders were not foolish when they said that a man might have Ngwu and still be killed by Ojukwu. 40 CHINUA ACHEBE But Nwaka survived his rashness. His head did not ache, nor his belly; and he did not groan in the middle of the night. Perhaps this was the meaning of the recitative he sang at the Idemili festival that year. He had a great Mask which he assumed on this and other important occasions. The Mask was called Ogalanya or Man of Riches, and at every Idemili festival crowds of people from all the villages and their neighbours came to the ilo of Umunneora to see this great Mask bedecked with mirrors and rich cloths of many colours. That year the Mask spoke a monologue full of boast. Some of those who knew the language of ancestral spirits said that Nwaka spoke of his challenge to Ulu. Folk assembled, listen and hear my words. There is a place, Beyond Knowing, where no man or spirit ventures unless he holds in his right hand his kith and his left hand his kin. But I, Ogalanya, Evil Dog that Warms His Body through the Head, I took neither kith nor kin and yet went to this place. The flute called him Ogalanya A jo Mmo, and the big drum replied. When I got there the first friend I made turned out to be a wizard. I made another friend and found he was a poisoner. I made my third friend and he was a leper. I, Ogalanya, who cuts kpom and pulls waa, I made friends with a leper from whom even a poisoner flees. The flute and the drum spoke again. Ogalanya danced a few steps to the right and then to the left, turned round sharply and saluted empty air with his matchet. I returned from my sojourn. Afo passed, Nkwo passed, Eke passed, Oye passed. Afo came round again. I listened, but my head did not ache, my belly did not ache; I did not feel dizzy. Tell me, folk assembled, a man who did this, is his arm strong or not? The crowd replied: His arm is indeed very strong. The flute and all the drums joined in the reply. In the five years since these things happened people sometimes ask themselves how a man could defy Ulu and live to boast. It was better to say that it was not Ulu the man taunted; he had not called the gods name. But if it was, where did Nwaka get this power? For when we see a little bird dancing in the middle of the pathway we must know that its drummer is in the near-by bush. Nwakas drummer and praise-singer was none other than the priest of Idemili, the personal deity of Umunneora. This man, Ezidemili, was Arrow of God 41 Nwakas great friend and mentor. It was he who fortified Nwaka and sent him forward. For a long time no one knew this. There were few things happening in Umuaro which Ezeulu did not know. He knew that the priest of Idemili and Ogwugwu and Eru and Udo had never been happy with their secondary role since the villages got together and made Ulu and put him over the older deities. But he would not have thought that one of them would go so far as to set someone to challenge Ulu. It was only the incident of the sacred python that opened Ezeulus eyes. But that was later. The friendship between Nwaka and Ezidemili began in their youth. They were often seen together. Their mothers had told them that they were born within three days of each other, Nwaka being the younger. They were good wrestlers. But in other ways they were very different. Nwaka was tall and of a light skin; Ezidemili was very small and black as charcoal; and yet it was he who had the other like a goat on a lead. Later their lives took different paths, but Nwaka still sought the others advice before he did any important thing. This was strange because Nwaka was a great man and a great orator who was called Owner of Words by his friends. It was his friendship with Ezidemili which gradually turned him into Ezeulus mortal enemy. One of the ways Ezidemili accomplished this was to constantly assert that in the days before Ulu the true leaders of each village had been men of high title like Nwaka. One day as Nwaka sat with Ezidemili in his obi drinking palm wine and talking about the affairs of Umuaro their conversation turned, as it often did, on Ezeulu. Has anybody ever asked why the head of the priest of Ulu is removed from the body at death and hung up in the shrine? asked Ezidemili rather abruptly. It was as though the question having waited for generations to be asked had now broken through by itself. Nwaka had no answer to it. He knew that when an Ezeulu or an Ezidemili died their heads were separated from their body and placed in their shrine. But no one had ever told him why this happened. In truth I do not know, he said. I can tell you that even Ezeulu does not know. Nwaka emptied the wine in his horn and hit it twice on the floor. 42 CHINUA ACHEBE He knew that a great story was coming, but did not want to appear too expectant. He poured himself another hornful. It is a good story, but I do not think that I have ever told it to anyone before. I heard it from the mouth of the last Ezidemili just before he died. He paused and drank a little from his horn. This palm wine has water in it. Every boy in Umuaro knows that Ulu was made by our fathers long ago. But Idemili was there at the beginning of things. Nobody made it. Do you know the meaning of Idemili? Nwaka shook his head slightly because of the horn at his lips. Idemili means Pillar of Water. As the pillar of this house holds the roof so does Idemili hold up the Raincloud in the sky so that it does not fall down. Idemili belongs to the sky and that is why I, his priest, cannot sit on bare earth. Nwaka nodded his head. . . . Every boy in Umuaro knew that Ezidemili did not sit on bare earth. And that is why when I die I am not buried in the earth, because the earth and the sky are two different things. But why is the priest of Ulu buried in the same way? Ulu has no quarrel with earth; when our fathers made it they did not say that his priest should not touch the earth. But the first Ezeulu was an envious man like the present one; it was he himself who asked his people to bury him with the ancient and awesome ritual accorded to the priest of Idemili. Another day when the present priest begins to talk about things he does not know, ask him about this. Nwaka nodded again in admiration and fillipped his fingers. The place where the Christians built their place of worship was not far from Ezeulus compound. As he sat in his obi thinking of the Festival of the Pumpkin Leaves, he heard their bell: GOME, GOME, GOME, GOME, GOME. His mind turned from the festival to the new religion. He was not sure what to make of it. At first he had thought that since the white man had come with great power and conquest it was necessary that some people should learn the ways of his deity. That was why he had agreed to send his son, Oduche, to learn the new ritual. He also wanted him to learn the white mans wisdom, for Ezeulu knew from what he saw of Wintabota and the stories he heard about his people that the white man was very wise. But now Ezeulu was becoming afraid that the new religion was like Arrow of God 43 a leper. Allow him a handshake and he wants to embrace. Ezeulu had already spoken strongly to his son who was becoming more strange every day. Perhaps the time had come to bring him out again. But what would happen if, as many oracles prophesied, the white man had come to take over the land and rule? In such a case it would be wise to have a man of your family in his band. As he thought about these things Oduche came out from the inner compound wearing a white singlet and a towel which they had given him in the school. Nwafo came out with him, admiring his singlet. Oduche saluted his father and set out for the mission because it was Sunday morning. The bell continued ringing in its sad monotone. Nwafo came back to the obi and asked his father whether he knew what the bell was saying. Ezeulu shook his head. It is saying: Leave your yam, leave your cocoyam and come to church. That is what Oduche says. Yes, said Ezeulu thoughtfully. It tells them to leave their yam and their cocoyam, does it? Then it is singing the song of extermination. They were interrupted by loud and confused talking inside the compound, and Nwafo ran out to see what it was. The voices were getting louder and Ezeulu who normally took no interest in womens shouting began to strain his ear. But Nwafo soon rushed back. Oduches box is moving, he said, out of breath with excitement. The tumult in the compound grew louder. As usual the voice of Ezeulus daughter, Akueke, stood out above all others. What is called Oduches box is moving? he asked, rising with deliberate slowness to belie his curiosity. It is moving about the floor. There is nothing that a man will not hear nowadays. He went into his inner compound through the door at the back of his obi. Nwafo ran past him to the group of excited women outside his mothers hut. Akueke and Matefi did most of the talking. Nwafo s mother, Ugoye, was speechless. Now and again she rubbed her palms together and showed them to the sky. Akueke turned to Ezeulu as soon as she saw him. Father, come and see what we are seeing. This new religion . . . Shut your mouth, said Ezeulu, who did not want anybody, least 44 CHINUA ACHEBE of all his own daughter, to continue questioning his wisdom in sending one of his sons to join the new religion. The wooden box had been brought from the room where Oduche and Nwafo slept and placed in the central room of their mothers hut where people sat during the day. The box, which was the only one of its kind in Ezeulus compound, had a lock. Only people of the church had such boxes made for them by the mission carpenter and they were highly valued in Umuaro. Oduches box was not actually moving; but it seemed to have something inside it struggling to be free. Ezeulu stood before it wondering what to do. Whatever was inside the box became more violent and actually moved the box around. Ezeulu waited for it to calm down a little, bent down and carried the box outside. The women and children scattered in all directions. Whether it be bad medicine or good one, I shall see it today, he said as he carried the box at arms length like a potent sacrifice. He did not pass through his obi, but took the door in the red-earth wall of his compound. His second son, Obika, who had just come in followed him. Nwafo came closely behind Obika, and the women and children followed fearfully at a good distance. Ezeulu looked back and asked Obika to bring him a matchet. He took the box right outside his compound and finally put it down by the side of the common footpath. He looked back and saw Nwafo and the women and children. Every one of you go back to the house. The inquisitive monkey gets a bullet in the face. They moved back not into the compound but in front of the obi. Obika took a matchet to his father who thought for a little while and put the matchet aside and sent him for the spear used in digging up yams. The struggling inside the box was as fierce as ever. For a brief moment Ezeulu wondered whether the wisest thing was not to leave the box there until its owner returned. But what would it mean? That he, Ezeulu, was afraid of whatever power his son had imprisoned in a box. Such a story must never been told of the priest of Ulu. He took the spear from Obika and wedged its thin end between the box and its lid. Obika tried to take the spear from him, but he would not hear it. Stand aside, he told him. What do you think is fighting inside? Two cocks? He clenched his teeth in an effort to lever the top open. Arrow of God 45 It was not easy and the old priest was covered with sweat by the time he succeeded in forcing the box. What they saw was enough to blind a man. Ezeulu stood speechless. The women and the children who had watched from afar came running down. Ezeulus neighbour, Anosi, who was passing by branched in, and soon a big crowd had gathered. In the broken box lay an exhausted royal python. May the Great Deity forbid, said Anosi. An abomination has happened, said Akueke. Matefi said: If this is medicine, may it lose its potency. Ezeulu let the spear fall from his hand. Where is Oduche? he asked. No one answered. I said where is Oduche? His voice was terrible. Nwafo said he had gone to church. The sacred python now raised its head above the edge of the box and began to move in its dignified and unhurried way. Today I shall kill the boy with my own hands, said Ezeulu as he picked up the matchet which Obika had brought at first. May the Great Deity forbid such a thing, said Anosi. I have said it. Oduches mother began to cry, and the other women joined her. Ezeulu walked slowly back to his obi with the matchet. The royal python slid away into the bush. What is the profit of crying? Anosi asked Ugoye. Wont you find where your son is and tell him not to return home today? He has spoken the truth, Ugoye, said Matefi. Send him away to your kinsmen. We are fortunate the python is not dead. You are indeed fortunate, said Anosi to himself as he continued on his way to Umunneora to buy seed-yams from his friend. I have already said that what this new religion will bring to Urnuaro wears a hat on its head. As he went he stopped and told anyone he met what Ezeulus son had done. Before midday the story had reached the ears of Ezidemili whose deity, Idemili, owned the royal python. It was five years since Ezeulu promised the white man that he would send one of his sons to church. But it was only two years ago that he fulfilled the promise. He wanted to satisfy himself that the white man had not come for a short visit but to build a house and live. At first Oduche did not want to go to church. But Ezeulu called 46 CHINUA ACHEBE him to his obi and spoke to him as a man would speak to his best friend and the boy went forth with pride in his heart. He had never heard his father speak to anyone as an equal. The world is changing, he had told him. I do not like it. But I am like the bird Eneke-nti-oba. When his friends asked him why he was always on the wing he replied: Men of today have learnt to shoot without missing and so I have learnt to fly without perching/ I want one of my sons to join these people and be my eye there. If there is nothing in it you will come back. But if there is something there you will bring home my share. The world is like a Mask dancing. If you want to see it well you do not stand in one place. My spirit tells me that those who do not befriend the white man today will be saying had we known tomorrow. Oduches mother, Ugoye, was not happy that her son should be chosen for sacrifice to the white man. She tried to reason with her husband, but he was impatient with her. How does it concern you what I do with my sons? You say you do not want Oduche to follow strange ways. Do you not know that in a great mans household* there must be people who follow all kinds of strange ways? There must be good people and bad people, honest workers and thieves, peace-makers and destroyers; that is the mark of a great obi. In such a place, whatever music you beat on your drum there is somebody who can dance to it. If Oduche had any reluctance left after his father had talked to him it was removed as soon as he began to go to church. He found that he could learn very quickly and he began to think of the day when he could speak the language of the white man, just as their teacher, Mr. Molokwu, had spoken with Mr. Holt when he had visited their church. But there was somebody else who had impressed Oduche even more. His name was Blackett, a West Indian missionary. It was said that this man although black had more knowledge than white men. Oduche thought that if he could get one-tenth of Blacketts knowledge he would be a great man in Umuaro. He made very good progress and was popular with his teacher and members of the church. He was younger than most other converts, being only fifteen or sixteen. The teacher, Mr. Molokwu, expected great things of him and was preparing him for baptism when he was transferred to Okperi. The new teacher was a man from the Niger Arrow of God 47 Delta. He spoke the white mans language as if it was his own. His name was John Goodcountry. Mr. Goodcountry told the converts of Umuaro about the early Christians of the Niger Delta who fought the bad customs of their people, destroyed shrines and killed the sacred iguana. He told them of Joshua Hart, his kinsman, who suffered martyrdom in Bonny. If we are Christians, we must be ready to die for the faith, he said. You must be ready to kill the python as the people of the rivers killed the iguana. You address the python as Father. It is nothing but a snake, the snake that deceived our first mother, Eve. If you are afraid to kill it do not count yourself a Christian. The first Umuaro man to kill and eat a python was Josiah Madu of Umuagu. But the story did not spread outside the little group of Christians, most of whom refused, however, to follow Josiahs example. They were led by Moses Unachukwu, the first and the most famous convert in Umuaro. Unachukwu was a carpenter, the only one in all those parts. He had learnt the trade under the white missionaries who built the Onitsha Industrial Mission. In his youth he had been conscripted to carry the loads of the soldiers who were sent to destroy Abame as a reprisal for the killing of a white man. What Unachukwu saw during that punitive expedition taught him that the white man was not a thing of fun. And so after his release he did not return to Umuaro but made his way to Onitsha, where he became house-boy to the carpenter-missionary, J. P. Hargreaves. After over ten years sojourn in a strange land, Unachukwu returned to Umuaro with the group of missionaries who succeeded after two previous failures in planting the new faith among his people. Unachukwu regarded the success of this third missionary effort as due largely to himself. He saw his sojourn in Onitsha as a parallel to that of the Moses of the Old Testament in Egypt. As the only carpenter in the neighbourhood Moses Unachukwu built almost single-handed the new church in Umuaro. Now he was not only a lay reader but a pastors warden although Umuaro did not have a pastor as yet, only a catechist. But it showed the great esteem in which Moses Unachukwu was held in the young church. The last catechist, Mr. Molokwu, consulted him in whatever he did. Mr. Goodcountry, on the other hand, attempted from the very first to ignore him. But Moses was not a man to be ignored lightly. 48 CHINUA ACHEBE Mr. Goodcountrys teaching about the sacred python gave Moses the first opportunity to challenge him openly. To do this he used not only the Bible but, strangely enough for a convert, the myths of Umuaro. He spoke with great power for, coming as he did from the village which carried the priesthood of Idemili, he knew perhaps more than others what the python was. On the other side, his great knowledge of the Bible and his sojourn in Onitsha which was the source of the new religion gave him confidence. He told the new teacher quite bluntly that neither the Bible nor the catechism asked converts to kill the python, a beast full of ill omen. Was it for nothing that God put a curse on its head? he asked, and then turned abruptly into the traditions of Umuaro. Today there are six villages in Umuaro; but this has not always been the case. Our fathers tell us that there were seven before, and the seventh was called Umuama. Some of the converts nodded their support. Mr. Goodcountry listened patiently and contemptuously. One day six brothers of Umuama killed the python and asked one of their number, Iweka, to cook yam pottage with it. Each of them brought a piece of yam and a bowl of water to Iweka. When he finished cooking the yam pottage the men came one by one and took their pieces of yam. Then they began to fill their bowls to the mark with the yam stew. But this time only four of them took their measure before the stew got finished. Moses Unachukwus listeners smiled, except Mr. Goodcountry who sat like a rock. Oduche smiled because he had heard the story as a little boy and forgotten it until now. The brothers began to quarrel violently, and then to fight. Very soon the fighting spread throughout Umuama, and so fierce was it that the village was almost wiped out. The few survivors fled their village, across the great river to the land of Olu where they are scattered today. The remaining six villages seeing what had happened to Umuama went to a seer to know the reason, and he told them that the royal python was sacred to Idemili; it was this deity which had punished Umuama. From that day the six villages decreed that henceforth anyone who killed the python would be regarded as having killed his kinsman. Moses ended by counting on his fingers the villages and clans which also forbade the killing of the snake. Then Mr. Goodcountry spoke. Arrow of God 49 A story such as you have just told us is not fit to be heard in the house of God. But I allowed you to go on so that all may see the foolishness of it. There was murmuring from the congregation which might have stood either for agreement or disagreement. I shall leave it to your own people to answer you. Mr. Goodcountry looked round the small congregation, but no one spoke. Is there no one here who can speak up for the Lord? Oduche who had thus far inclined towards Unachukwus position had a sudden stab of insight. He raised his hand and was about to put it down again. But Mr. Goodcountry had seen him. Yes? It is not true that the Bible does not ask us to kill the serpent. Did not God tell Adam to crush its head after it had deceived his wife? Many people clapped for him. Do you hear that, Moses? Moses made to answer, but Mr. Goodcountry was not going to give him another opportunity. You say you are the first Christian in Umuaro, you partake of the Holy Meal; and yet whenever you open your mouth nothing but heathen filth pours out. Today a child who sucks his mothers breast has taught you the Scriptures. Is it not as Our Lord himself said that the first shall become last and the last become first. The world will pass away but not one single word of Our Lord will be set aside. He turned to Oduche. When the time comes for your baptism you will be called Peter; on this rock will I build my Church. This caused more clapping from a part of the congregation. Moses was now fully aroused. Do I look to you like someone you can put in your bag and walk away? he asked. I have been to the fountainhead of this new religion and seen with my own eyes the white people who brought it. So I want to tell you now that I will not be led astray by outsiders who choose to weep louder than the owners of the corpse. You are not the first teacher I have seen; you are not the second; you are not the third. If you are wise you will face the work they sent you to do here and take your hand off the python. You can say that I told you so. Nobody here has complained to you that the python has ever blocked his way as he came to church. If you want to do your work in peace you will heed 50 CHINUA ACHEBE what I have said, but if you want to be the lizard that ruined his own mothers funeral you may carry on as you are doing. He turned to Oduche. As for you they may call you Peter or they may call you Paul or Barnabas; it does not pull a hair from me. I have nothing to say to a mere boy who should be picking palm nuts for his mother. But since you have also become our teacher I shall be waiting for the day when you will have the courage to kill a python in this Umuaro. A coward may cover the ground with his words but when the time comes to fight he runs away. At that moment Oduche took his decision. There were two pythons a big one and a small onewhich lived almost entirely in his mothers hut, on top of the wall which carried the roof. They did no harm and kept the rats away; only once were they suspected of frightening away a hen and swallowing her eggs. Oduche decided that he would hit one of them on the head with a big stick. He would do it so carefully and secretly that when it finally died people would think it had died of its own accord. Six days passed before Oduche found a favourable moment, and during this time his heart lost some of its strength. He decided to take the smaller python. He pushed it down from the wall with his stick but could not bring himself to smash its head. Then he thought he heard people coming and had to act quickly. With lightning speed he picked it up as he had seen their neighbour, Anosi, do many times, and carried it into his sleeping-room. A new and exciting thought came to him then. He opened the box which Moses had built for him, took out his singlet and towel and locked the python inside. He felt a great relief within. The python would die for lack of air, and he would be responsible for its death without being guilty of killing it, which seemed to him a very happy compromise. Ezeulus first son, Edogo, had left home early that day to finish the mask he was carving for a new ancestral spirit. It was now only five days to the Festival of the Pumpkin Leaves when this spirit was expected to return from the depths of the earth and appear to men as a Mask. Those who would act as his attendants were making great plans for his coming; they had learnt their dance and were now anxious about the mask Edogo was carving for them. There were other carvers in Umuaro besides him; some of them were even better. But Edogo Arrow of God 51 had a reputation for finishing his work on time unlike Obiako, the master carver, who only took up his tools when he saw his customers coming. If it had been any other kind of carving Edogo would have finished it long ago, working at it any moment his hands were free. But a mask was different; he could not do it in the home under the profane gaze of women and children but had to return to the spirit-house built for such work at a secluded corner of the Nkwo market place where no one who had not been initiated into the secret of Masks would dare to approach. The hut was dark inside although the eye got used to it after a short while. Edogo put down the white okwe wood on which he was going to work and then unslung his goat-skin bag in which he carried his tools. Apart from the need for secrecy, Edogo had always found the atmosphere of this hut right for carving masks. All around him were older masks and other regalia of ancestral spirits, some of them older than even his father. They produced a certain ambience which gave power and cunning to his fingers. Most of the masks were for fierce, aggressive spirits with horns and teeth the size of fingers. But four of them belonged to maiden-spirits and were delicately beautiful. Edogo remembered with a smile what Nwanyinma told him when he first married his wife. Nwanyinma was a widow with whom he had made friends in his bachelor days. In her jealousy against the younger rival she had told Edogo that the only woman whose breasts stayed erect year after year was the maiden-spirit. Edogo sat down on the floor near the entrance where there was the most light and began to work. Now and again he heard people talking as they passed through the market place from one village of Umuaro to another. But when his carving finally got hold of him he heard no more voices. The mask was beginning to come out of the wood when Edogo suddenly stopped and turned his ear in the direction of the voices which had broken into his work. One of the voices was very familiar; yes, it was their neighbour, Anosi. Edogo listened very hard and then stood up and went to the wall nearest the market centre. He could now hear quite clearly. Anosi seemed to be talking to two or three other men he had just met. Yes. I was there and saw it with my own eyes, he was saying. I 52 CHINUA ACHEBE would not have believed it had somebody else told me. I saw the box opened and a python inside it. Do not repeat it, said one of the others. It cannot be true. That is what everybody says: it cannot be true. But I saw it with my own eyes. Go to Umuachala now and see the whole village in turmoil. What that man Ezeulu will bring to Umuaro is pregnant and nursing a baby at the same time. I have heard many things, but never till today have I heard of an abomination of this kind. By the time Edogo reached home his father was still in a very bad temper, only that now his anger was not so much against Oduche as against all the double-faced neighbours and passers-by whose words of sympathy barely concealed the spitefulness in their hearts. And even if they had been sincere Ezeulu would still have resented anybody making him an object of pity. At first his anger smouldered inwardly. But the last group of women who went in to see his wives, looking like visitors to a place of death, inflamed his wrath. He heard them in the inner compound shouting: E-u-u! What shall we do to the children of today? Ezeulu strode into the compound and ordered them to leave. If I see any one of you still here when I go and come back she will know that I am an evil man. What harm have we done in coming to console another woman? I say leave this place at once! The women hurried out saying: Forgive us; we have erred. It was therefore a very irate Ezeulu to whom Edogo told his story of what he had heard at the Nkwo market place. When he finished his father asked him curtly: And what did you do when you heard that? What should I have done? Edogo was surprised and a little angry at his fathers tone. Dont you hear him? asked Ezeulu of no one. My first son, somebody says to your hearing that your father has committed an abomination, and you ask me what you should have done. When I was your age I would have known what to do. I would have come out and broken the mans head instead of hiding in the spirit-house. Edogo was now really angry but he controlled his tongue. When Arrow of God 53 you were my age your father did not send one of his sons to worship the white mans god. He walked away to his own hut full of bitterness for having broken off his carving to come and see what was happening at home, only to be insulted. I blame Obika for his fiery temper, thought Ezeulu, but how much better is a fiery temper than this cold ash! He inclined backwards and rested his head on the wall behind him and began to gnash his teeth. It was a day of annoyance for the Chief Priestone of those days when it seemed he had woken up on the left side. As if he had not borne enough vexation already he was now visited, at sunset, by a young man from Umunneora. Because of the hostility between Ezeulus village and Umunneora he did not offer the man kolanut lest he should have a belly-ache later and attribute it to Ezeulus hospitality. The man did not waste much time before he gave his message. I am sent by Ezidemili. True? I trust he is well. He is well, replied the messenger. But at the same time he is not. I do not understand you. Ezeulu was now very alert. If you have a message, deliver it because I have no time to listen to a boy learning to speak in riddles. The young man ignored the insult. Ezidemili wants to know what you are going to do about the abomination which has been committed in your house. That what happened? asked the Chief Priest, holding his rage firmly with two hands. Should I repeat what I have just said? Yes. All right. Ezidemili wants to know how you intend to purify your house of the abomination that your son committed. Go back and tell Ezidemili to eat shit. Do you hear me? Tell Ezidemili that Ezeulu says he should go and fill his mouth with shit. As for you, young man, you may go in peace because the world is no longer what it was. If the world had been what it was I would have given you something to remind you always of the day you put your 54 CHINUA ACHEBE head into the mouth of a leopard. The young man wanted to say something but Ezeulu did not allow him. If you want to do something with your life, take my advice and say not another word here. Ezeulu rose threateningly to his full height; the young man decided to heed his advice and rose to go. 5 Captain T. K. Winterbottom stared at the memorandum before him with irritation and a certain amount of contempt. It came from the Lieutenant-Governor through the Resident through the Senior District Officer to him, the last two adding each his own comment before passing the buck down the line. Captain Winterbottom was particularly angry at the tone of the Senior District Officers minute. It was virtually a reprimand for what he was pleased to describe as Winterbottom s stonewalling on the issue of the appointment of Paramount Chiefs. Perhaps if this minute had been written by any other person Captain Winterbottom would not have minded so much; but Watkinson had been his junior by three years and had been promoted over him. Any fool can be promoted, Winterbottom always told himself and his assistants, provided he does nothing but try. Those of us who have a job to do have no time to try. He lit his pipe and began to pace his spacious office. He had de- 56 CHINUA ACHEBE signed it himself and had made it open and airy. As he walked up and down he noticed for the first time, although it had always been there, the singing of prisoners, as they cut the grass outside. It was amazing how tall it had grown in the two rainfalls which had come so close together. He went to the window and watched the prisoners for a while. One of them supplied the beat with something that looked like a piece of stone on an empty bottle and sang a short solo; the others sang the chorus and swung their blades to the beat. Captain Winterbottom removed his pipe, placed it on the window-sill, cupped his hands over his mouth and shouted: Shut up there! They all looked up and saw who it was and stopped their music. Their blades went up and down haphazardly thereafter. Then their warder who had been standing under the shade of a mango tree a little distance away thought it was safest to take his men to another spot where they would not disturb the D.O. So he marched them off in a ragged double file to another part of Government Hill. They all wore dirty-white jumpers made from baft and a skull cap to match. Two of them carried headpans and the soloist clutched his bottle and stone. As soon as they settled down in their new place he raised a song and blades swung up and down to the beat: When I cut grass and you cut Whats your right to call me names? Back at his desk Captain Winterbottom read the Lieutenant-Governors memorandum again: My purpose in these paragraphs is limited to impressing on all Political Officers working among the tribes who lack Natural Rulers the vital necessity of developing without any further delay an effective system of indirect rule based on native institutions. To many colonial nations native administration means government by white men. You are all aware that H.M.G. considers this policy as mistaken. In place of the alternative of governing directly through Administrative Officers there is the other method of trying while we endeavour to purge the native system of its abuses to build a higher civilization upon the soundly rooted native stock that had its foundation in the hearts and minds and thoughts of the people and therefore on which we can more easily build, moulding it and establishing it into lines consonant with modern ideas and higher standards, and yet all the time enlisting the real force of the spirit of the people, instead of killing all that out and trying to start afresh. We Arrow of God 57 must not destroy the African atmosphere, the African mind, the whole foundation of his race . . . Words, words, words. Civilization, African mind, African atmosphere. Has His Honour ever rescued a man buried alive up to his neck, with a piece of roast yam on his head to attract vultures? He began to pace up and down again. But why couldnt someone tell the bloody man that the whole damn thing was stupid and futile. He knew why. They were all afraid of losing their promotion or the O.B.E. Mr. Clarke walked in to say he was off on his first tour of the district. Captain Winterbottom waved him away with Have a good trip which he said almost without looking at him. But as he turned to go he called him back. When you are in Umuaro find out as much as you canvery discreetly of courseabout Wright and his new road. Ive heard all kinds of ugly stories of whippings and that kind of business. Without prejudging the issue I may say that I wouldnt put anything past Wright, from sleeping with native women to birching their men. . . . All right Ill see you in a weeks time. Take care of yourself. Remember, no chances with the water. Have a good trip. This short interruption made it possible for Captain Winterbottom to return to the Lieutenant-Governors memorandum with diminished anger. Instead he now felt tired and resigned. The great tragedy of British colonial administration was that the man on the spot who knew his African and knew what he was talking about found himself being constantly overruled by starry-eyed fellows at headquarters. Three years ago they had put pressure on Captain Winterbottom to appoint a Warrant Chief for Okperi against his better judgement. After a long palaver he had chosen one James Ikedi, an intelligent fellow who had been among the very first people to receive missionary education in these parts. But what had happened? Within three months of this man receiving his warrant Captain Winterbottom began to hear rumours of his high-handedness. He had set up an illegal court and a private prison. He took any woman who caught his fancy without paying the customary bride-price. Captain Winterbottom went into the whole business thoroughly and uncovered many more serious scandals. He decided to suspend the fellow for six months, and accordingly withdrew his warrant. But after three months the Senior Resident who 58 CHINUA ACHEBE had just come back from leave and had no first-hand knowledge of the matter ruled that the rascal be reinstated. And no sooner was he back in power than he organized a vast system of mass extortion. There was at that time a big programme of road and drainage construction following a smallpox epidemic. Chief James Ikedi teamed up with a notorious and drunken road overseer who had earned the title of Destroyer of Compounds from the natives. The plans for the roads and drains had long been completed and approved by Captain Winterbottom himself and as far as possible did not interfere with peoples homesteads. But this overseer went around intimidating the villagers and telling them that unless they gave him money the new road would pass through the middle of their compound. When some of them reported the matter to their chief he told them there was nothing he could do; that the overseer was carrying out the orders of the white man and anyone who had no money to give should borrow from his neighbour or sell his goats or yams. The overseer took his toll and moved on to another compound, choosing only the wealthy villagers. And to convince them that he meant business he actually demolished the compounds of three people who were slow in paying, although no road or drain was planned within half a mile of their homes. Needless to say, Chief Ikedi took a big slice of this illegal tax. Thinking of this incident Captain Winterbottom could find some excuse for the overseer. He was a man from another clan; in the eyes of the native, a foreigner. But what excuse could one offer for a man who was their blood brother and chief? Captain Winterbottom could only put it down to cruelty of a kind which Africa alone produced. It was this elemental cruelty in the psychological make-up of the native that the starry-eyed European found so difficult to understand. Chief Ikedi was of course a very clever man and when Captain Winterbottom began to investigate this second scandal it was quite impossible to incriminate him; he had covered up his tracks so well. So Captain Winterbottom lost his main quarry, at any rate for the present; he had no doubt however that he would catch him one of these days. As for the overseer he sentenced him to eighteen months penal servitude. There was no doubt whatever in the mind of Captain Winterbottom that Chief Ikedi was still corrupt and high-handed only cleverer than ever before. The latest thing he did was to get his people to make Arrow of God 59 him an obi or king, so that he was now called His Highness Ikedi the First, Obi of Okperi. This among a people who abominated kings! This was what British administration was doing among the Ibos, making a dozen mushroom kings grow where there was none before. Captain Winterbottom slept on the Lieutenant-Governors memorandum and decided that there was little he could do to stop the stupid trend. He had already sacrificed his chances of promotion by too frequently speaking his mind; practically all the officers who joined the Nigerian Service when he did were now Residents and he was not even a Senior District Officer. Not that he cared particularly, but in this matter of Indirect Rule there did not seem to be any point in continuing his objection when fellows who until now had been one with him in opposition had suddenly swung round to blame him for not implementing it. He was now under orders to find a chief and his duty was clear. But he must not repeat the mistake of looking for some mission-educated smart alec. As far as Umuaro was concerned his mind was practically made up. He would go for that impressive-looking fetish priest who alone of all the witnesses who came before him in the Okperi versus Umuaro land case spoke the truth. Provided of course he was still alive. Captain Winterbottom remembered seeing him again once or twice during his routine visits to Umuaro. But that was at least two years ago. 6 The outrage which Ezeulus son committed against the sacred python was a very serious matter; Ezeulu was the first to admit it. But the ill will of neighbours and especially the impudent message sent him by the priest of Idemili left him no alternative but to hurl defiance at them all. He was full of amazement at the calumny which even people he called his friends were said to be spreading against him. It is good for a misfortune like this to happen once in a while, he said, so that we can know the thoughts of our friends and neighbours. Unless the wind blows we do not see the fowls rump. He sent for his wife and asked her where her son was. She stood with her arms folded across her breasts and said nothing. For the past two days she had been full of resentment against her husband because it was he who send Oduche to the church people in spite of her opposition. Why should he now sharpen his matchet to kill him for doing what they taught him in the church? Am I talking to a person or a carved nkwu? Arrow of God 61 I don't know where he is. You do not know? He he he he he he,  he laughed mechanically and then became very serious again. You must be telling me in your mind that a man who brings home ant-infested faggots should not complain if he is visited by lizards. You are right. But do not tell me you dont know where your son is. . . . Is he my son now? He ignored her question. Do not tell me you dont know where he is because it is a lie. You may call him out from where you are hiding him. I have not killed anybody before and I will not start with my son. But he will not go to that church again. That is a lie also. I have said that he will go there and he will go. If anybody does not like it he can come and jump on my back. That afternoon Oduche returned, looking like a fowl soaked in the rain. He greeted his father fearfully but he ignored him completely. In the inner compound the women welcomed him without enthusiasm. The little children, especially Obiageli, searched him closely as if to see whether he had altered in any way. Although Ezeulu did not want anybody to think that he was troubled or to make him appear like an object of pity, he did not ignore the religious implications of Oduches act. He thought about it seriously on the night of the incident. The custom of Umuaro was well known and he did not require the priest of Idemili to instruct him. Every Umuaro child knows that if a man kills the python inadvertently he must placate Idemili by arranging a funeral for the snake almost as elaborate as a mans funeral. But there was nothing in the custom of Umuaro for the man who puts the snake into a box. Ezeulu was not saying that it was not an offence, but it was not serious enough for the priest of Idemili to send him an insulting message. It was the kind of offence which a man put right between himself and his personal god. And what was more the Festival of the New Pumpkin Leaves would take place in a few days. It was he, Ezeulu, who would then cleanse the six villages of this and countless other sins, before the planting season. Not very long after Oduches return Ezeulu was visited by one of his in-laws from Umuogwugwu. This man, Onwuzuligbo, was one of 62 CHINUA ACHEBE those who came to Ezeulu one year this planting season to find out why their kinsman and husband of Ezeulus daughter had been beaten and carried away from their village. It looks as if my death is near, said Ezeulu. Why is that, in-law? Do I look like death? When a man sees an unfamiliar sight, then perhaps his death is coming. You are right, in-law, it is indeed a long time since I came to see you. But we have a saying that the very thing which kills mother rat prevents its little ones from opening their eyes. If all goes well we hope to come and go again as in-laws should. Ezeulu sent his son, Nwafo, to bring a kolanut from his mother. Meanwhile he reached for the little wooden bowl which had a lump of white clay in it. Here is a piece of nzu,  he said as he rolled the chalk towards his guest, who picked it up and drew on the floor between his legs three erect lines and a fourth lying down under them. Then he painted one of his big toes and rolled the chalk back to Ezeulu who put it away again. After they had eaten a kolanut Onwuzuligbo cleared his throat and thanked Ezeulu, and then asked: Is our wife well? Your wife? She is well. Nothing troubles her except hunger. Nwafo, go and call Akueke to salute her husbands kinsman. Nwafo soon returned and said she was coming. Akueke came in almost at once. She saluted her father and shook hands with Onwuzuligbo. Is your wife, Ezinma, well? she asked. She is well today. Tomorrow is what we do not know. And her children? We have no trouble except hunger. Aaah! said Akueke, that cannot be true. Look how well fed you are. When Akueke went back to the inner compound Onwuzuligbo told Ezeulu that his people had sent him to say that they would like to pay a visit to their in-law on the following morning. I shall not run away from my house, said Ezeulu. Arrow of God 63 We shall not bring war to you. We are coming to whisper together like in-law and in-law. Ezeulu was grateful for the one happy event in a week of trouble and vexation. He sent for his head wife, Matefi and told her to get ready to cook for his in-laws tomorrow. Which in-laws? she asked. Akuekes husband and his people. There is no cassava in my hut, and today is not a market. So what do you want me to do? asked Ezeulu. I dont want you to do anything. But Akueke may have some cassava if you ask her. This madness which they say you have must now begin to know its bounds. You are telling me to go and find cassava for you. What has Akueke to do with it; is she my wife? I have told you many times that you are a wicked woman. I have noticed that you will not do anything happily unless it is for yourself or your children. Dont let me speak my mind to you today. He paused. If you want this compound to contain the two of us, go and do what I told you. If Akuekes mother were alive she would not draw a line between her children and yours and you know it. Go away from here before I rise to my feet. Although Ezeulu was very anxious for his daughter, Akueke, to return to her husband nobody expected him to say so openly. A man who admitted that his daughter was not always welcome in his home or that he found her presence irksome was in effect telling her husband to treat her as roughly as he liked. So when Akuekes husband finally came round to announcing his intention to take his wife home, Ezeulu made a show of objecting. It is right for a man to take his wife home, he said. But I want to remind you that when we begin to plant crops it will be one year since she began to live in my compound. Did you bring yams or cocoyams or cassava to feed her and her child? Or do you think that they are still carrying the breakfast they ate in your house last year? Ibe and his people made some vague, apologetic noises. What I want to know, said Ezeulu, is how you will pay me for taking care of your wife for one year. In-law, I understand you very well, said Onwuzuligbo. Leave everything to us. You know that a mans debt to his father-in-law can 64 CHINUA ACHEBE never be fully discharged. When we buy a goat or a cow we pay for it and it becomes our own. But when we marry a wife we must go on paying until we die. We do not dispute that we owe you. Our debt is even greater than you say. What about all the years from her birth to the day we took her from you? Indeed we owe you a great debt, but we ask you to give us time. Let me agree with you, said Ezeulu, but I am agreeing in cowardice. Besides Ezeulus two grown-up sons, Edogo and Obika, his younger brother was also present. His name was Okeke Onenyi. He had said very little so far; but now it appeared to him that his brother was yielding too readily and he decided to speak. My in-laws, I salute you. I have not said anything because the man who has no gift for speaking says his kinsmen have said all there is to say. Since you began to speak I have been listening very hard to hear one thing from your mouth, but I have not heard it. Different people have different reasons for marrying. Apart from children which we all want, some men want a woman to cook their meals, some want a woman to help on the farm, others want someone they can beat. What I want to learn from your mouth is whether our in-law has come because he has no one to beat when he wakes up in the morning nowadays. Onwuzuligbo promised on behalf of his kinsman that Akueke would not be beaten in future. Then Ezeulu sent for her to find out whether she wanted to return to her husband. She hesitated and then said she would go if her father was satisfied. My in-laws, I salute you, said Ezeulu. Akueke will return, but not today. She will need a little time to get ready. Today is Oye; she will come back to you on the Oye after next. When she comes, treat her well. It is not bravery for a man to beat his wife. I know a man and his wife must quarrel; there is no abomination in that. Even brothers and sisters from the same womb do disagree; how much more two strangers. No, you may quarrel, but let it not end in fighting. I shall say no more at present. Ezeulu was grateful to Ulu for bringing about so unexpectedly the mending of the quarrel between Akueke and her husband. He was sure that Ulu did it to put him in the right mind for purifying the six Arrow of God 65 villages before they put their crops into the ground. That very evening his six assistants came to him for their orders and he sent them to announce each man in his own village that the Feast of the Pumpkin Leaves would take place on the following Nkwo. Ugoye was still cooking supper when the criers ogene sounded. Ugoye was notorious for her late cooking. Although Ezeulu often rebuked Matefi for cooking late Ugoye deserved the rebuke even more. But she was wiser than the senior wife; she never cooked late on the days she sent food to her husband. But on all other days her pestle would be heard far into the night. She was particularly slack when, as now, she was forbidden to cook for any grown man on account of her uncleanness. Her daughter, Obiageli, and Akuekes daughter, Nkechi, were telling each other stories. Nwafo sat on the small mud-seat at the foot of the huts central pillar watching them with a superior air and pointing out now and again their mistakes. Ugoye stirred the soup on the fire and tasted it by running her tongue on the back of the ladle. The sound of the ogene caught her in the action. Keep quiet, you children, and let me hear what they are saying. GOME GOME GOME GOME. Ora Obodo, listen! Ezeulu has asked me to announce that the Festival of the Pumpkin Leaves will take place on the coming Nkwo. GOME GOME GOME GOME. Ora Obodo! Ezeulu has asked me . . . Obiageli had broken off her story so that her mother could hear the criers message. While she waited impatiently her eyes fell on the soup ladle and, to occupy herself, she picked it up from the wooden bowl where it lay and proceeded to lick it dry. Glutton, said Nwafo. It is this lick lick lick which prevents woman from growing a beard. And where, big man, is your beard? asked Obiageli. GOME GOME GOME GOME. Folks of the village. The Chief Priest of Ulu has asked me to tell every man and every woman that the Festival of the First Pumpkin Leaves will be held on the coming Nkwo market day. GOME GOME GOME GOME. 66 CHINUA ACHEBE The crier's voice was already becoming faint as he took his message down the main pathway of Umuachala. Shall we go back to the beginning? asked Nkechi. Yes, said Obiageli. The big ukwa fruit has fallen on Nwaka Dimkpolo and killed him. I shall sing the story and you reply. But I was replying before, protested Nkechi, it is now my turn to sing. You are going to spoil everything now. You know we did not complete the story before the crier came. Do not agree, Nkechi, said Nwafo. She wants to cheat you because she is bigger than you are. Nobody has called your name in this, ant-hill nose. You are asking for a cry. Dont listen to him, Nkechi. After this it will be your turn to sing and I shall reply. Nkechi agreed and Obiageli began to sing again: And who will punish this Water for me? E-e Nwaka Dimkpolo Earth will dry up this water for me E-e Nwaka Dimkpolo Who will punish this Earth for me? ... No, no, no, Nkechi broke in. What can happen to Earth, silly girl? asked Nwafo. I said it on purpose to test Nkechi, said Obiageli. It is a lie, as old as you are you cant even tell a simple story. If it pains you, come and jump on my back, ant-hill nose. Mother, if Obiageli abuses me again I shall beat her. Touch her if you dare and I shall cure you of your madness this night. Let us change to another story, said Obiageli. This one has no end. At the same time she reached for the ladle which had just returned from another visit to the soup pot on the fire. But her mother snatched it from her. 7 The market place was filling up steadily with men and women from every quarter. Because it was specially their day, the women wore their finest cloths and ornaments of ivory and beads according to the wealth of their husbands or, in a few exceptional cases, the strength of their own arms. Most of the men brought palm wine in pots carried on the head or gourds dangling by the side from a loop of rope. The first people to arrive took up positions under the shade of trees and began to drink with their friends, their relations and their in-laws. Those who came after sat in the open which was not hot yet. A stranger to this year's festival might go away thinking that Umuaro had never been more united in all its history. In the atmosphere of the present gathering the great hostility between Umunneora and Umuachala seemed, momentarily, to lack significance. Yesterday if two men from the two villages had met they would have watched each others movement with caution and suspicion; tomorrow they would do so again. But today they drank palm wine freely together because no man in his right mind would carry poison to a 68 CHINUA ACHEBE ceremony of purification; he might as well go out into the rain carrying potent, destructive medicines on his person. Ezeulus younger wife examined her hair in a mirror held between her thighs. She could not help feeling that she did a better job on Akuekes hair than Akueke did on hers. But she was very pleased with the black patterns of uli and faint yellow lines of ogalu on her body. In previous years she would have been among the first to arrive at the market place; she would have been carefree and joyful. But this year her feet seemed to drag because of the load on her mind. She was going to pray for the cleansing of her hut which Oduche had defiled. She was no longer one of the many, many Umuaro women taking part in a general and all-embracing rite. Today she stood in special need. The weight of this feeling all but crushed the long-awaited pleasure of wearing her new ivory bracelets which had earned her so much envy and hostility from her husbands other wife, Matefi. She was still polishing the ivory when Matefi set out for the Nkwo market place. Before she went she called out from the middle of the compound: Is Obiagelis mother ready? No. We shall be following. You need not wait. When she was fully prepared Ugoye went behind her hut to the pumpkin which she specially planted after the first rain and cut four leaves, tied them together with banana string and returned to her hut. She put the leaves down on a stool and went to the bamboo shelf to examine the soup pot and the foofoo which Obiageli and Nwafo would eat at midday. Akueke stooped at the threshold and peeped into Ugoyes hut. So you are not ready to go yet? What are you fussing about like a hen in search of a nest? she asked. At this rate we shall find nowhere to stand at the market place. Then she came into the hut carrying her own bunch of pumpkin leaves. They admired each others cloths and Akueke praised Ugoyes ivory once again. As soon as they set out Akueke asked: What do you think was Matefis annoyance this morning? I should ask you; is she not your fathers wife? Her face was as big as a mortar. Did she ask if you were ready to go? She did; but it went no deeper than the lips. ~\9 9 Arrow of God 69 In all the time I have come across bad people, said Akueke, I have not yet met anyone like her. Her own badness whistles. Since my father asked her to cook for my husband and his people the day before yesterday her belly has been full of bile. On ordinary Nkwo days the voice of the market carried far in all directions like the approach of a great wind. Today it was as though all the bees in the world were passing overhead. And people were still flowing in from all the pathways of Umuaro. As soon as they emerged from their compound Ugoye and Akueke joined one such stream. Every woman of Umuaro had a bunch of pumpkin leaves in her right hand; any woman who had none was a stranger from the neighbouring villages coming to see the spectacle. As they approached Nkwo its voice grew bigger and bigger until it drowned their conversation. They were just in time to see the arrival of the five wives of Nwaka and the big stir they caused. Each of them wore not anklets but two enormous rollers of ivory reaching from the ankle almost to the knee. Their walk was perforce slow and deliberate, like the walk of an Ijele Mask lifting and lowering each foot with weighty ceremony. On top of all this the women were clad in many coloured velvets. Ivory and velvets were not new in Umuaro but never before had they been seen in such profusion from the house of one man. Obika and his good friend, Ofoedu, sat with three other young men from Umuagu on the crude mat woven on the ground by exposed roots of an ogbu tree. In their midst stood two black pots of palm wine. Just outside their circle one empty pot lay on its side. One of the men was already drunk, but neither Obika nor Ofoedu appeared to have drunk a drop yet. Is it true, Obika, asked one of the men, that your new bride has not returned after her first visit? Yes, my friend, Obika replied light-heartedly. My things always turn out differently from other people's. If I drink water it sticks between my teeth. Do not heed him, said Ofoedu. Her mother is ill and her father asked if she could stay back and look after her for a while. Aha, I knew the story I heard could not be true. How could a young bride hesitate over a handsome ugonachomma like Obika? Ah, my friend, come out from that, said the half-drunk man. She may not like the size of his penis. 70 CHINUA ACHEBE But she has never seen it, said Obika. You are talking to small boys of yesterday: She has not seen it! Soon after, the great Ikolo sounded. It called the six villages of Umuaro one by one in their ancient order: Umunneora, Umuagu, Umuezeani, Umuogwugwu, Umuisiuzo and Umuachala. As it called each village an enormous shout went up in the market place. It went through the number again but this time starting from the youngest. People began to hurry through their drinking before the arrival of the Chief Priest. The Ikolo now beat unceasingly; sometimes it called names of important people of Umuaro, like Nwaka, Nwosisi, Igboneme and Uduezue. But most of the time it called the villages and their deities. Finally it settled down to saluting Ulu, the deity of all Umuaro. Obiozo Ezikolo was now an old man, but his mastery of the king of all drums was still unrivalled. Many years ago when he was still a young man the six villages had decided to confer the ozo title on him for his great art which stirred the hearts of his kinsmen so powerfully in times of war. Now in his old age it was a marvel where he got the strength to work as he did. Even climbing on to the Ikolo was a great feat for a man half his age. Now those who were near enough surrounded the drum and looked upwards to admire the ancient drummer. A man well known to him raised his voice and saluted him. He shouted back: An old woman is never old when it comes to the dance she knows. The crowd laughed. The Ikolo was fashioned in the olden days from a giant iroko tree at the very spot where it was felled. The Ikolo was as old as Ulu himself at whose order the tree was cut down and its trunk hollowed out into a drum. Since those days it had lain on the same spot in the sun and in the rain. Its body was carved with men and pythons and little steps were cut on one side; without these the drummer could not climb to the top to beat it. When the Ikolo was beaten for war it was decorated with skulls won in past wars. But now it sang of peace. A big ogene sounded three times from Ulus shrine. The Ikolo took it up and sustained an endless flow of praises to the deity. At the same time Ezeulus messengers began to clear the centre of the market place. Although they were each armed with a whip of palm frond they had a difficult time. The crowd was excited and it was only after a struggle Arrow of God 71 that the messengers succeeded in clearing a small space in the heart of the market place, from which they worked furiously with their whips until they had forced all the people back to form a thick ring at the edges. The women with their pumpkin leaves caused the greatest difficulty because they all struggled to secure positions in front. The men had no need to be so near and so they formed the outside of the ring. The ogene sounded again. The Ikolo began to salute the Chief Priest. The women waved their leaves from side to side across their faces, muttering prayers to Ulu, the god that kills and saves. Ezeulus appearance was greeted with a loud shout that must have been heard in all the neighbouring villages. He ran forward, halted abruptly and faced the Ikolo. Speak on, he said to it, Ezeulu hears what you say. Then he stooped and danced three or four steps and rose again. He wore smoked raffia which descended from his waist to the knee. The left half of his bodyfrom forehead to toeswas painted with white chalk. Around his head was a leather band from which an eagles feather pointed backwards. On his right hand he carried Nne Ofio, the mother of all staffs of authority in Umuaro, and in his left he held a long iron staff which kept up a quivering rattle whenever he stuck its pointed end into the earth. He took a few long strides, pausing on each foot. Then he ran forward again as though he had seen a comrade in the vacant air; he stretched his arm and waved his staff to the right and to the left. And those who were near enough heard the knocking together of Ezeulus staff and another which no one saw. At this many fled in terror before the priest and the unseen presences around him. As he approached the centre of the market place Ezeulu reenacted the First Coming of Ulu and how each of the four Days put obstacles in his way. At that time, when lizards were still in ones and twos, the whole people assembled and chose me to carry their new deity. I said to them:  Who am I to carry this fire on my bare head? A man who knows that his anus is small does not swallow an udala seed.  They said to me:  Fear not. The man who sends a child to catch a shrew will also give him water to wash his hand.  I said: So be it.  72 CHINUA ACHEBE And we set to work. That day was Eke: we worked into Oye and then into Afo. As day broke on Nkwo and the sun carried its sacrifice I carried my Alusi and, with all the people behind me, set out on that journey. A man sang with the flute on my right and another replied on my left. From behind the heavy tread of all the people gave me strength. And then all of a sudden something spread itself across my face. On one side it was raining, on the other side it was dry. I looked again and saw that it was Eke. I said to him: Ts it you, Eke? He replied: It is I, Eke, the One that makes a strong man bite the earth with his teeth.  I took a hens egg and gave him. He took it and ate and gave way to me. We went on, past streams and forests. Then a smoking thicket crossed my path, and two men were wrestling on their heads. My followers looked once and took to their heels. I looked again and saw that it was Oye. I said to him: Is it you, Oye, across my path? He said: It is I, Oye, the One that began cooking before Another and so has more broken pots.  I took a white cock and gave him. He took it and made way for me. I went on past farmlands and wilds and then I saw that my head was too heavy for me. I looked steadily and saw that it was Afo. I said: Is it you, Afo? He said: It is I, Afo, the great river that cannot be salted.  I replied: 7 am Ezeulu, the hunchback more terrible than a leper.  Afo shrugged and said: Pass, your own is worse than mine.  Ipassed and the sun came down and beat me and the rain came down and drenched me. Then I met Nkwo. I looked on his left and saw an old woman, tired, dancing strange steps on the hill. I looked to the right and saw a horse and saw a ram. I slew the horse and with the ram I cleaned my matchet, and so removed that evil.  By now Ezeulu was in the centre of the market place. He struck the metal staff into the earth and left it quivering while he danced a few more steps to the Ikolo which had not paused for breath since the priest emerged. All the women waved their pumpkin leaves in front of them. Ezeulu looked round again at all the men and women of Umuaro, but saw no one in particular. Then he pulled the staff out of the ground, and with it in his left hand and the Mother of Ofo in his right he jumped forward and began to run round the market place. Arrow of God 73 All the women set up a long, excited ululation and there was renewed jostling for the front line. As the fleeing Chief Priest reached any section of the crowd the women there waved their leaves round their heads and flung them at him. It was as though thousands and thousands of giant, flying insects swarmed upon him. Ugoye who had pushed and shoved until she got to the front murmured her prayer over and over again as the Chief Priest approached the part of the circle where she stood: Great Ulu who kills and saves, I implore you to cleanse my household of all defilement. If I have spoken it with my mouth or seen it with my eyes, or if I have heard it with my ears or stepped on it with my foot or if it has come through my children or my friends or kinsfolk let it follow these leaves.  She waved the small bunch in a circle round her head and flung it with all her power at the Chief Priest as he ran past her position. The six messengers followed closely behind the priest and, at intervals, one of them bent down quickly and picked up at random one bunch of leaves and continued running. The Ikolo drum worked itself into a frenzy during the Chief Priests flight especially its final stages when he, having completed the full circle of the market place, ran on with increasing speed into the sanctuary of his shrine, his messengers at his heels. As soon as they disappeared the Ikolo broke off its beating abruptly with one last KOME. The mounting tension which had gripped the entire market place and seemed to send its breath going up, up and up exploded with this last beat of the drum and released a vast and deep breathing down. But the moment of relief was very short-lived. The crowd seemed to rouse itself quickly to the knowledge that their Chief Priest was safe in his shrine, triumphant over the sins of Umuaro which he was now burying deep into the earth with the six bunches of leaves. As if someone had given them a sign, all the women of Umunneora broke out from the circle and began to run round the market place, stamping their feet heavily. At the beginning it was haphazard but soon everyone was stamping together in unison and a vast cloud of dust rose from their feet. Only those whose feet were weighed down by age or by ivory were out of step. When they had gone round they rejoined the standing crowd. Then the women of Umuagu burst 74 CHINUA ACHEBE through from every part of the huge circle to begin their own run. The others waited and clapped for them; no one ran out of turn. By the time the women of the sixth village ran their race the pumpkin leaves that had lain so thickly all around were smashed and trodden into the dust. As soon as the running was over the crowd began to break up once more into little groups of friends and relations. Akueke sought out her elder sister, Adeze, whom she had last seen running with the other women of Umuezeani. She did not search very far because Adeze stood out in any crowd. She was tall and bronze-skinned; if she had been a man she would have resembled her father even more than Obika. I thought perhaps you had gone home, said Adeze. I saw Matefi just now but she had not seen you at all. How could she see me? Im not big enough for her to see. Are you two quarrelling again? I thought I saw it on her face. What have you done to her this time? My sister, leave Matefi and her trouble aside and let us talk about better things. At that point Ugoye joined them. I have been looking for you two all over the market place, she said. She embraced Adeze whom she called Mother of my Husband. How are the children? asked Adeze. Is it true you have been teaching them to eat python? You think it is something for making people laugh? Ugoye sounded very hurt. No wonder you are the only person in Umuaro who did not care to come and ask what was happening. Was anything happening? Nobody told me. Was it a fire or did someone die? Do not mind Adeze, Ugoye, said her sister. She is worse than her father. Did you expect what the leopard sired to be different from the leopard? No one replied. Do not be angry with me, Ugoye. I heard everything. But our enemies and those jealous of us were waiting to see us running up and down in confusion. It is not Adeze will give them that satisfaction. That Arrow of God 75 mad woman, Akueni Nwosisi, whose family has committed every abomination in Umuaro came running to me to show her pity. I asked her whether someone who put a python in a box was not to be preferred to her kinsman caught behind the house copulating with a shegoat. Ugoye and Akueke laughed. They could clearly visualize their aggressive sister putting this question. You are coming with us? asked Akueke. Yes, I must see the children. And perhaps I shall exact a fine or two from Ugoye and Matefi; I fear they look after my father halfheartedly. Please, husband, I implore you, cried Ugoye in mock fear. I do my best. It is your father who ill-treats me. And when you talk to him, she added seriously, ask him why at his age he must run like an antelope. Last year he could not get up for days after the ceremony. Dont you know, asked Akueke looking furtively back to see if a man was near; there was no one; even so she lowered her voice, Dont you know that in his younger days he used to run as Ogbazulobodo? As Obika does now. It is you people, especially the two of you, who lead him astray. He likes to think that he is stronger than any young man of today and you people encourage him. If he were my father I would let him know the truth. Is he not your husband? asked Adeze. If he dies tomorrow are you not the one to sit in ashes in the cooking-place for seven markets? Is it you or me will wear sackcloth for one year? What am I telling you? asked Akueke, changing the subject. My husband and his people came the other day. What did they come for? What else would they come for? So they are tired of waiting, small beasts of the bush. I thought they were waiting for you to take palm wine to beg them. Dont abuse my husbands people, or we shall fight, said Akueke pretending anger. Please forgive me. I did not know that you and he had suddenly become palm oil and salt again. When are you going back to him? One market come next Oye. 8 The new road which Mr. Wright was building to connect Okperi with its enemy, Umuaro, had now reached its final stages. Even so it would not be finished before the onset of the rainy season if it was left to the paid gang he was using. He had thought of increasing the size of this gang but Captain Winterbottom had told him that far from authorizing any increase he was at that very moment considering a retrenchment as the Vote for Capital Works for the financial year was already largely overspent. Mr. Wright had then toyed with the idea of reducing the labourers pay from threepence a day to something like twopence. But this would not have increased the labour force substantially; not even halving their pay would have achieved the desired result, even if Mr. Wright could have found it in his heart to treat the men so meanly. In fact he had got very much attached to this gang and knew their leaders by name now. Many of them were, of course, bone lazy and could only respond to severe handling. But once you got used to them they could be quite amusing. They were as loyal as pet dogs and their ability to Arrow of God 77 improvise songs was incredible. As soon as they were signed on the first day and told how much they would be paid they devised a work song. Their leader sang: Lebula toro toro and all the others replied: A day, at the same time swinging their matchets or wielding their hoes. It was a most effective work song and they sang it for many days: Lebula toro toro A day Lebula toro toro A day  And they sang it in English too! Anyhow there was only one alternative left to Mr. Wright if he was to complete the road before June and get away from this hole of a place. He had to use unpaid labour. He asked for permission to do this, and after due consideration Captain Winterbottom gave his approval. In the letter conveying it he pointed out that it was the policy of the Administration to resort to this method only in the most exceptional circumstances . . . The natives cannot be an exception to the aphorism that the labourer is worthy of his hire. Mr. Wright who had come to Government Hill from his P.W.D. Road Camp about five miles away to get this reply, glanced through it, crumpled it and put it in the pocket of his khaki shorts. Like all practical types he had little respect for administrative red tape. When the leaders of Umuaro were told to provide the necessary labour for the white mans new, wide road they held a meeting and decided to offer the services of the two latest age groups to be admitted into full manhood: the age group that called itself Otakagu, and the one below it which was nicknamed Omumawa. These two groups never got on well together. They were, like two successive brothers, always quarrelling. In fact it was said that the elder group who when they came of age took the name Devourer Like Leopard were so contemptuous of their younger brothers when they came of age two years later that they nicknamed them Omumawa, meaning that the mans cloth they tied between the legs was a feint to cover small boys penes. It was a good joke, and so overpowered the attempt of the new group to take a more befitting name. For this reason they nursed a grudge against Otakagu, and a meeting of the 78 CHINUA ACHEBE two was often like the meeting of fire and gunpowder. Whenever they could, therefore, they went by separate ways; as in the case of the white mans new road. All that Mr. Wright asked for was two days in the week, and so the two age groups arranged to work separately on alternate Eke days. On these occasions the white man came over from the paid gang which he had turned into an orderly and fairly skilled force to supervise the free but undisciplined crowd from Umuaro. Because of his familiarity with the white mans language the carpenter, Moses Unachukwu, although very much older than the two age groups, had come forward to organize them and to take words out of the white mans mouth for them. At first Mr. Wright was inclined to distrust him, as he distrusted all uppity natives but he soon found him very useful and was now even considering giving him some little reward when the road was finished. Meanwhile Unachukwus reputation in Umuaro rose to unprecedented heights. It was one thing to claim to speak the white mans tongue and quite another to be seen actually doing it. The story spread throughout the six villages. Ezeulus one regret was that a man of Umunneora should have this prestige. But soon, he thought, his son would earn the same or greater honour. It was the turn of the Otakagu age group to work on the new road on the day following the Festival of the Pumpkin Leaves. Ezeulus second son, Obika, and his friend, Ofoedu, belonged to this group. But they had drunk so much palm wine on the day before that when all the other people went to work they were still asleep. Obika who had staggered home almost at cock-crow defied the combined effort of his mother and sister to rouse him. It had happened on the festival day that as Obika and Ofoedu drank with the three men at the market place, one of the men had thrown a challenge to them. The conversation had turned on the amount of palm wine a good drinker could take without losing knowledge of himself. It all depends on the palm tree and the tapper, said one of the men. Yes, agreed his friend, Maduka. It depends on the tree and the man who taps it. That is not so. It depends on the man who drinks. You may bring any tree in Umuaro and any tapper, said Ofoedu, and I shall still drink my bellyful and go home with clear eyes. Arrow of God 79 Obika agreed with his friend. It is true that some trees are stronger than others and some tappers are better than others, but a good drinker will defeat them both. Have you heard of the palm tree in my village which they call Okposalebo? Obika and Ofoedu said no. Anyone who has not heard of Okposalebo and yet claims to be a good drinker deceives himself. What Maduka says is very true, said one of the others. The wine from this tree is never sold in the market, and no one can drink three hornfuls and still know his way home. This Okposalebo is a very old tree. It is called Disperser of a Kindred because two brothers would fight like strangers after drinking two hornfuls of its wine. Tell us another story, Obika said, filling his horn. If the tapper adds medicine to his wine that is another matter, but if you are telling us of the fluid as the tree yields it, then I say tell us another story. Then Maduka threw the challenge. It is not profitable to speak too many words. The palm tree is not in the distant riverain country, but here in Umuaro. Let us go from here to Nwokafos compound and ask him to give us a gourd from this tree. It is very costlythe gourd may be ego-nesebut I shall pay. If you two drink three hornfuls each and still go home let it be my loss. But if not you must give me ego-neli whenever you come to your senses again. It was as Maduka had said. The two boasters had fallen asleep where they sat, and when night came he left them there and retired to his bed. But he came out twice in the night and found them still snoring. When he woke up finally in the morning, they were gone. He wished he had seen them depart. Perhaps when they heard their betters talking about palm wine in future they would not open their mouths so wide. Ofoedu did not seem to have fared as badly as Obika. When he woke up and found that the sun was already shining he rushed to Ezeulus compound to call Obika. But although they shouted his name and shook him he showed no sign of stirring. Eventually Ofoedu poured a gourd of cold water over him and he woke up. The two then set out to join their age group working on the new road. They were like a pair of Night Masks caught abroad by daylight. 8o CHINUA ACHEBE Ezeulu who lay in his obi prostrate from the exhaustion of the festival was wakened by all the commotion in the inner compound. He asked Nwafo the meaning of all the noise and was told that they were trying to rouse Obika. He said nothing more, only gnashed his teeth. The young mans behaviour was like a heavy load on his fathers head. In a few days, Ezeulu said within himself, Obikas new bride would arrive. She would have come already if her mother had not fallen sick. When she arrived what a husband she would find! A man who could not watch his hut at night because he was dead with palm wine. Where did the manhood of such a husband lie? A man who could not protect his wife if night marauders knocked at his door. A man who was roused in the morning by the women. Tujia! spat the old priest. He could not contain his disgust. Although Ezeulu did not ask for details he knew without being told that Ofoedu was behind this latest episode. He had said it over and over again that this fellow Ofoedu did not contain the smallest drop of human presence inside his entire body. It was hardly two years since he sent everybody running to his fathers compound in a false fire alarm for which his father, who was not a rich man, paid a fine of one goat. Ezeulu had told Obika again and again that such a person was not a fit friend for anyone who wanted to do something with his life. But he had not heeded and today there was as little to choose between them as between rotten palm nuts and a broken mortar. When the two friends first set out to join their age group they walked in silence. Obika felt an emptiness on top as if his head had been numbed by a whole nights fall of dew. But the walking was already doing him some good; the feeling was returning that the head belonged to him. After one more turning on the narrow, ancient footpath they saw, a little distance ahead of them, a vast opening which was the beginning of the new road. It opened like day after a thick night. What do you think of that thing Maduka gave us? asked Ofoedu. This was the first mention either of them made to the incident of the previous day. Obika did not reply. He merely produced a sound which lay half-way between a sign of relief and a groan. It was not naked palm wine, said Ofoedu. They put some potent herbs in it. When I think of it now we were very foolish to have Arrow of God 81 followed such a dangerous man to his own house. Do you remember that he did not drink even one hornful/ Obika still said nothing. I shall not pay the ego-neli to him. Were you thinking at any time that you would pay? Obika looked surprised. I regard anything we said yesterday as words spoken in honour of palm wine. They were now on the portion of the new road that had been built. It made one feel lost like a grain of maize in an empty goatskin bag. Obika changed his matchet from the left hand to the right and his hoe from the right to left. The feeling of openness and exposure made him alert. As the new road did not point in the direction of a stream or a market Ofoedu and Obika did not encounter many villagers, only a few women now and again carrying heavy loads of firewood. What is that I am hearing? asked Obika. They were now approaching the old, ragged egbu tree from which the night spirits called Onyekulum began their journey loaded with song and gossip in the carefree season after the harvest. I was just about to ask you. It sounds like a funeral song. As they drew nearer to the work site there was no longer any doubt. It was indeed the dirge with which a corpse was taken into the burial forest: Look! a python! Look! a python! Yes, it lies across the way.  The two men recognized it now and also recognized the singers as men of their age group. They burst out laughing together. Someone had given the ancient song a new and irreverent twist and changed it into a half familiar, half strange and hilarious work-song. Ofoedu was certain that he saw the hand of Nweke Ukpaka in it, it was the kind of malicious humour he had. The approach of Obika and his friend brought about a sudden change among the workers. Their singing stopped and with it the sound of scores of matchets cutting together into tree-trunks. Those who bent forward with hoes to level the cleared parts stopped and 82 CHINUA ACHEBE straightened up, their feet still planted wide apart, covered with red earth. Nweke Ukpaka raised his voice and shouted: Kwo Kwo Kwo Kwo Kwo! All the men replied: Kwooooh oh! and everyone burst out laughing at this imitation of women acknowledging a present. Mr. Wrights irritation mounted dangerously. He clutched the whip in his right hand more firmly and planted the other hand menacingly on his hip. His white helmet made him look even more squat than he was. Moses Unachukwu was talking excitedly to him, but he did not seem to be listening. He stared unwaveringly at the two approaching late-comers and his eyes seemed to Moses to get smaller and smaller. The others wondered what was going to happen. Although the white man always carried a whip he had rarely used it; and when he had done he had appeared to be half joking. But this morning he must have got out of bed from the left side. His face smoked with anger. Noticing the mans posture Obika put more swagger into his walk. This brought more laughter from the men. He made to pass Mr. Wright who, unable to control his anger any more, lashed out violently with his whip. It flashed again and this time caught Obika around the ear, and stung him into fury. He dropped his matchet and hoe and charged. But Moses Unachukwu had thrown himself between the two men. At the same time Mr. Wrights two assistants jumped in quickly and held Obika while he gave him half a dozen more lashes on his bare back. He did not struggle at all; he only shivered like the sacrificial ram which must take in silence the blows of funeral dancers before its throat is cut. Ofoedu trembled also, but for once in his life he saw a fight pass before him and could do nothing but look on. Are you mad to attack a white man? screamed Moses Unachukwu in sheer amazement. I have heard that not one person in your fathers house has a right head. What do you have in mind when you say that? asked a man from Obikas village who had smelt in Unachukwus statement the hostility between Umuachala and Umunneora. The crowd which had hitherto watched in silence now broke hurriedly into the quarrel and before long loud threats were uttered on all sides and at least one person wagged his finger in anothers face. It Arrow of God 83 seemed so much easier to deal with an old quarrel than with a new, unprecedented incident. Shut up, you black monkeys, and get down to work! Mr. Wright had a grating voice but one that carried far. Truce was immediately established. He turned to Unachukwu and said: Tell them I shall not tolerate any more slackness. Unachukwu translated. Tell them this bloody work must be finished by June. The white man says that unless you finish this work in time you will know the kind of man he is. No more lateness. Pardin? Pardon what? Cant you understand plain, simple English? I said there will be no more late-coming. Oho. He says everybody must work hard and stop all this shiteating. I have one question I want the white man to answer. This was Nweke Ukpaka. Whats that? Unachukwu hesitated and scratched his head. Dat man wan axe master queshon. No questions. Yessah. He turned to Nweke. The white man says he did not leave his house this morning to come and answer your questions. The crowd grumbled. Wright shouted that if they did not immediately set to work they would be seriously dealt with. There was no need to translate this; it was quite clear. The matchets began to sound again on tree-trunks and those who worked with hoes bent down once more. But as they worked they arranged a meeting. Nothing came of it. The first disagreement was over the presence of Moses Unachukwu. Many peoplelargely from Umuachala village saw no reason why a man of another age group should sit in on their deliberations. Others pointed out that this was a special meeting to discuss the white man and for that reason it would be foolish to exclude the only kinsman who knew the ways of these white people. At 84 CHINUA ACHEBE this point Ofoedu stood up and, to everyones surprise, joined those who wanted Moses to stay. But my reason is different, he added. I want him to say before us all what he said before the white man about Obikas family. I want him also to say before us all whether it is true that he incited the white man to whip our comrade. When he has given us these answers he may go away. You ask me why he should go away? I shall tell you. This is a meeting of Otakagu age group. He belongs to Akakanma. And let me remind you all, but especially those who are murmuring and interrupting me, that he also belongs to the white mans religion. But I do not want to talk about that now. All I say is that Unachukwu should answer the questions I have asked, and after that he may go and take with him all his knowledge of the white mans ways. We have all heard stories of how he came by this knowledge. We have heard that when he left Umuaro he went to cook like a woman in the white mans kitchen and lick his plates . . . The rest of Ofoedus speech was drowned in the tumult that broke out. It was just like Ofoedu, many people were saying, to open his mouth and let out his words alive without giving them as much as a bite with his teeth. Others said he had spoken the truth. Anyhow, it took a very long time to establish peace again. Moses Unachukwu was saying something but no one heard, until the tumult had spent itself. By then his voice had gone hoarse. If you ask me to go away I shall do so at once. Do not go! We permit you to stay! But if I go away it will not be due to the barking of that mad dog. If there were any shame left in the world how could that beast of the bush who could not give his father a second burial stand up before you and pass shit through his mouth . . . It is enough! We have not come here to abuse ourselves! When the discussion began again someone suggested that they should go to the elders of Umuaro and tell them that they could no longer work on the white mans road. But as speaker after speaker revealed the implications of such a step it lost all support. Moses told Arrow of God 85 them that the white man would reply by taking all their leaders to prison at Okperi. You all know how friendly we are with Okperi. Do you think that any Umuaro man who goes to prison there will come back alive? But that apart, do you forget that this is the moon of planting? Do you want to grow this years crops in the prison house in a land where your fathers owe a cow? I speak as your elder brother. I have travelled in Olu and I have travelled in Igbo, and I can tell you that there is no escape from the white man. He has come. When Suffering knocks at your door and you say there is no seat left for him, he tells you not to worry because he has brought his own stool. The white man is like that. Before any of you here was old enough to tie a cloth between the legs I saw with my own eyes what the white man did to Abame. Then I knew there was no escape. As daylight chases away darkness so will the white man drive away all our customs. I know that as I say it now it passes by your ears, but it will happen. The white man has power which comes from the true God and it burns like fire. This is the God about Whom we preach every eighth day . . Unachukwus opponents were now shouting that this was a meeting of an age group, that they had not assembled to join with him in chewing the seed of foolishness which they called their new religion. We are talking about the white mans road, said a voice above the others. Yes, we are talking about the white mans road. But when the roof and walls of a house fall in, the ceiling is not left standing. The white man, the new religion, the soldiers, the new roadthey are all part of the same thing. The white man has a gun, a matchet, a bow and carries fire in his mouth. He does not fight with one weapon alone. Nweke Ukpaka spoke next. What a man does not know is greater than he. Those of us who want Unachukwu to go away forget that none of us can say come in the white mans language. We should listen to his advice. If we go to our elders and tell them that we shall no longer work on the white mans road, what do we expect them to do? Will our fathers take up hoes and matchets and go out to work themselves while we sit at home? I know that many of us want to fight the white man. But only a foolish man can go after a leopard with his bare hands. The white man is like hot soup and we must take him slowlyslowly from the edges of the bowl. Umuaro was here before the white 86 CHINUA ACHEBE man came from his own land to seek us out. We did not ask him to visit us; he is neither our kinsman nor our in-law. We did not steal his goat or his fowl; we did not take his land or his wife. In no way whatever have we done him wrong. And yet he has come to make trouble for us. All we know is that our ofo is held high between us and him. The stranger will not kill his host with his visit; when he goes may he not go with a swollen back. I know that the white man does not wish Umuaro well. That is why we must hold our ofo by him and give him no cause to say that we did this or failed to do that. For if we give him cause he will rejoice. Why? Because the very house he has been seeking ways of pulling down will have caught fire of its own will. For this reason we shall go on working on his road; and when we finish we shall ask him if he has more work for us. But in dealing with a man who thinks you a fool it is good sometimes to remind him that you know what he knows but have chosen to appear foolish for the sake of peace. This white man thinks we are foolish; so we shall ask him one question. This was the question I had wanted to ask him this morning but he would not listen. We have a saying that a man may refuse to do what is asked of him but may not refuse to be asked, but it seems the white man does not have that kind of saying where he comes from. Anyhow the question which we shall beg Unachukwu to ask him is why we are not paid for working on his road. I have heard that throughout Olu and Igbo, wherever people do this kind of work the white man pays them. Why should our own be different? Ukpaka was a persuasive speaker and after him nobody else rose to speak. And the only decision of the meeting was then taken. The Otakagu age group asked Unachukwu to find out, at a well-chosen moment when it was safe to approach the white man, why he had not given them any money for working on his road. I shall carry your message to him, said Unachukwu. That message is not complete, said Nwoye Udora. It is not enough to ask him why we are not paid. He knows why and we know why. He knows that in Okperi those who do this kind of work are paid. Therefore the question you should ask him is this: Others are paid for this work; why are we not paid? Or is our own different? It is important to ask whether our own is different. This was agreed and the meeting broke up. Your words were very good, someone said to Nwoye Udora as Arrow of God 87 they left the market place. Perhaps the white man will tell us whether we killed his father or his mother. Ezeulu was not as broken down as his young wife had feared. True he had pains in his feet and thighs and his spittle had a bitter taste. But he had forestalled the worst effects of his exertion by having his body rubbed with a light ointment of camwood as soon as he returned home and by ensuring that a log fire burned beside his low bamboo bed all night. There was no medicine equal to camwood and fire. Very soon the priest would rise as sound as newly fired clay. If anyone had told Ezeulu about his younger wifes concern he would have laughed. It showed how little of a man his wives knew especially when, like Ugoye, they were no older than the mans first children. If Ugoye had known her husband in his earliest years as priest she might have realized that the exhaustion he felt after the festival had nothing to do with advancing age. Had it been that Ezeulu would not have yielded to it. His daughters made light of the wifes concern because they were wiser, being his daughters. They knew that this was a necessary conclusion to the festival. It was part of the sacrifice. For who could trample the sins and abominations of all Umuaro into the dust and not bleed in the feet? Not even a priest as powerful as Ezeulu could hope to do that. The story that the white man had whipped Obika spread through the villages while the age group held its meeting under the shade of ogbu trees in the market place. The story was brought home to Ezeulus compound by Edogos wife who was returning from the bush with a bundle of firewood on her head. Ezeulu was wakened from sleep by Obikas mother and sister weeping. He threw off the mat with which he had covered himself and sprang to his feet, his mind having run immediately to death. But then he heard Edogos wife talking, which would not happen if anyone had died. He sat down on the edge of his bed and, raising his voice, called Edogos wife. She immediately came into the obi followed by her husband who had been carving an iroko door for the compound of a titled man when his wife returned. What are you saying? Ezeulu asked Amoge. She repeated the story she had heard. 88 CHINUA ACHEBE Whip? he asked, unable to understand. But what offence did he commit? Those who told the story did not say. Ezeulu screwed his face in thought. I think he was late in going. But the white man would not whip a grown man who is also my son for that. He would be asked to pay a fine to his age group for being late; he would not be whipped. Or perhaps he hit the white man first ... Edogo was touched by the distress which his father felt but tried to conceal. It ought to have made him jealous of his younger brother but did not. I think I shall go to Nkwo where they are meeting, said Edogo. I cannot yet find meaning in this story. He returned to his hut, took his matchet and made to go out. His father who was still trying to understand how it could have happened called after him. When he came back into his obi Ezeulu advised him not to be rash. From what I know of your brother he is likely to have struck the first blow. Especially as he was drunk when he left home. There was already a change in his tone, and Edogo nearly smiled. He set out again, wearing only his work clotha long, thin strip passed between the legs and secured around the waist, with one end dangling in front and the other behind. Obikas mother came out of the compound sniffing and drawing the back of her fist across her eyes. Where is that one going? asked Ezeulu. I see that those who will fight the white man are lining up. He laughed as Matefi turned round to hear what he was saying. Go back to your hut, woman! Edogo had now reached the main footpath and turned left. Ezeulu now sat down on the iroko panel with his back against the wall so that he could see the approaches to his compound. His mind raced up and down in different directions trying vainly to make sense of the whipping story. Now he was thinking about the white man who did it. Ezeulu had seen him and heard his voice when he spoke to the elders of Umuaro about the new road. When the story had first spread that a white man was coming to talk to the elders Ezeulu had thought it would be his friend, Wintabota, the Destroyer of Guns. He had been greatly disappointed when he saw it was another white man. Wintabota Arrow of God 89 was tall and erect and carried himself like a great man. His voice sounded like thunder. This other man was short and thick, as hairy as a monkey. He spoke in a queer way without opening his mouth. Ezeulu thought he must be some kind of manual labourer in the service of Wintabota. Some people appeared at the junction of the main footpath and the approaches to Ezeulus compound. He jerked his head forward, but the men passed. Ezeulu came finally to the conclusion that unless his son was at fault he would go in person to Okperi and report the white man to his master. His thoughts were stopped by the sudden appearance of Obika and Edogo. Behind them came a third whom he soon recognized as Ofoedu. Ezeulu could never get used to this worthless young man who trailed after his son like a vulture after a corpse. He was filled with anger which was so great that it also engulfed his son. What was the cause of the whipping? he asked Edogo, ignoring the other two. Obikas mother and all the others in the compound had now hastened into Ezeulus obi. They were late for work. Why were you late? I have not come home to answer anybodys questions, Obika shouted. You may answer or not as you please. But let me tell you that this is only the beginning of what palm wine will bring to you. The death that will kill a man begins as an appetite. Obika and Ofoedu walked out. 9 Edogos homestead was built against one of the four sides of his fathers compound so that they shared one wall between them. It was a very small homestead with two huts, one for Edogo and the other for his wife, Amoge. It was built deliberately small for, like the compounds of many first sons it was no more than a temporary home where the man waited until he could inherit his fathers place. Of late another small compound had been built on the other side of Ezeulus for his second son, Obika. But it was not quite as small as Edogos. It also had two huts, one for Obika and the other for the bride who was soon to come. As one approached Ezeulus compound off the main village pathway Edogos place stood on the left and Obikas on the right. When Obika walked away with his friend, Edogo returned to the shade of the ogbu tree in front of his compound to resume work on the door he was carving. It was nearly finished and after it he would leave carving for while and face his farm work. He envied master craftsmen Arrow of God 91 like Agwuegbo whose farms were cultivated for them by their apprentices and customers. As he carved his mind kept wandering to his wifes hut from where the cry of their only child was reaching him. He was their second child, the first having died after three months. The one that died had brought sickness with him into the world; a ridge ran down the middle of his head. But the second, Amechi, had been different. At his birth he had seemed so full of life. Then at about the sixth month he had changed overnight. He stopped sucking his mothers breast and his skin took the complexion of withering cocoyam leaves. Some people said perhaps Amoges milk had gone bitter. She was asked to squirt some of it into a bowl to see if it would kill an ant. But the little ant which was dropped into it stayed alive; so the fault was not with the milk. Edogos mind was in pain over the child. Some people were already saying that perhaps he was none other than the first one. But Edogo and Amoge never talked about it; the woman especially was afraid. Since utterance had power to change fear into a living truth they dared not speak before they had to. In her hut Amoge sat on a low stool, her crying child set on the angle of her two feet which she had brought together to touch at the heels. After a while she lifted her feet and child together on to another spot leaving behind on the floor a round patch of watery, green excrement. She looked around the room but did not seem to find what she wanted. Then she called: Nwanku! Nwanku! Nwanku! A wiry, black dog rushed in from outside and made straight for the excrement which disappeared with four or five noisy flicks of its tongue. Then it sat down with its tail wagging on the floor. Amoge moved her feet and child once again but this time all that was left behind was a tiny green drop. Nwanku did not consider it big enough to justify getting up; it merely stretched its neck and took it up with the corner of the tongue and sat up again to wait. But the child had finished and the dog was soon trying without success to catch a fly between its jaws. Edogos thoughts refused to stay on the door he was carving. Once again he put down the hammer and changed the chisel from his left hand to the right. The child had now stopped crying and Edogos thoughts wandered to the recent exchange of words between his father and brother. The trouble with Ezeulu was that he could never see something and take his eyes away from it. Everybody agreed that 92 CHINUA ACHEBE Obikas friendship with Ofoedu would not bring about any good, but Obika was no longer a child and if he refused to listen to advice he should be left alone. That was what their father could never learn. He must go on treating his grown children like little boys, and if they ever said no there was a big quarrel. This was why the older his children grew the more he seemed to dislike them. Edogo remembered how much his father had liked him when he was a boy and how with the passage of years he had transferred his affection first to Obika and then to Oduche and Nwafo. Thinking of it now Edogo could not actually remember that their father had ever shown much affection for Oduche. He seemed to have lingered too long on Obika (who of all his sons resembled him most in appearance) and then by-passed Oduche for Nwafo. What would happen if the old man had another son tomorrow? Would Nwafo then begin to lose favour in his eyes? Perhaps. Or was there more to it than that? Was there something in the boy which told their father that at last a successor to the priesthood had come? Some people said Nwafo was in every way an image of Ezeulus father. Actually Edogo would feel greatly relieved if on the death of their father the diviners string of beads fell in favour of Nwafo. I do not want to be Chief Priest, he heard himself saying aloud. He looked round instinctively to see if anyone had been near enough to have heard him. As for Obika, he thought, things like the priesthood did not come near his mind. Which left only Oduche and Nwafo. But as Ezeulu had turned Oduche over to the new religion he could no longer be counted. A strange thought seized Edogo now. Could it be that their father had deliberately sent Oduche to the religion of the white man so as to disqualify him for the priesthood of Ulu? He put down the chisel with which he was absentmindedly straightening the intersecting lines on the iroko door. That would explain it! The priesthood would then fall on his youngest and favourite son. The reason which Ezeulu gave for his strange decision had never convinced anyone. If as he said he merely wanted one of his sons to be his eye and ear at this new assembly why did he not send Nwafo who was close to his thoughts? No, that was not the reason. The priest wanted to have a hand in the choice of his successor. It was what anyone who knew Ezeulu would expect him to do. But was he not presuming too much? The choice of a priest lay with the deity. Was it likely that he would let the old priest force his hand. Although Edogo Arrow of God 93 and Obika did not seem attracted to the office that would not prevent the deity from choosing either of them or even Oduche, out of spite. Edogos thinking now became confused. If Ulu should choose him to be Chief Priest what would he do? This thought had never worried him before because he had always taken it for granted that Ulu would not want him. But the way he saw things now there was no certainty about that. Would he be happy if the diviners beads fell in his favour? He could not say. Perhaps the only sure happiness it would give him was the knowledge that his fathers partiality for his younger sons had been frustrated by the deity himself. From Ani-Mmo where dead men went Ezeulu would look and see the ruin of all his plans. Edogo was surprised by this depth of ill will for his father and relented somewhat. He remembered what his mother used to say when she was alive, that Ezeulus only fault was that he expected everyonehis wives, his kinsmen, his children, his friends and even his enemiesto think and act like himself. Anyone who dared to say no to him was an enemy. He forgot the saying of the elders that if a man sought for a companion who acted entirely like himself he would live in solitude. Ezeulu was sitting at the same spot long after his quarrel with Obika. His back was set against the wall and his gaze on the approaches to his compound. Now and again he seemed to study the household shrine standing against the low threshold wall in front of him. On his left there was a long mud-seat with goatskins spread on it. The eaves on that part of the hut were cut back so that Ezeulu could watch the sky for the new moon. In the daytime light came into the hut mostly from that part. Nwafo squatted on the mud-seat, facing his father. At the other end of the room, on Ezeulus right, stood his low bamboo bed; beside it a fire of ukwa logs smouldered. Without changing his fixed gaze Ezeulu began suddenly to talk to Nwafo. A man does not speak a lie to his son, he said. Remember that always. To say My father told me is to swear the greatest oath. You are only a little boy, but I was no older when my father began to confide in me. Do you hear what I am saying? Nwafo said yes. You see what has happened to your brother. In a few days his bride will come and he will no longer be called a child. When strang- 94 CHINUA ACHEBE ers see him they will no longer ask Whose son is heP but Who is he? Of his wife they will no longer say Whose daughter? but Whose wife? Do you understand me? Nwafo saw that his face was beginning to shine with sweat. Someone was coming towards the hut and he stopped talking. Who is that? Ezeulu screwed up his eyes in an effort to see. Nwafo jumped down from the mud-seat and came to the centre of the hut to see. It is Ogbuefi Akuebue. Akuebue was one of the very few men in Umuaro whose words gained entrance into Ezeulus ear. The two men were in the same age group. As he drew near he raised his voice and asked: Is the owner of this house still alive? Who is this man? asked Ezeulu. Did they not say that you died two markets come next Afo? Perhaps you do not know that everyone in your age group has long died. Or are you waiting for mushrooms to sprout from your head before you know that your time is over? Akuebue was now inside the hut but he still maintained the posture he had assumed to pass under the low eavesthe right hand supported above the knee and the body bent at the waist. Without rising to his full height he shook hands with the Chief Priest. Then he spread his goatskin on the floor near the mud-seat and sat down. How are your people? They are quiet. This was always how Akuebue answered about his family. It amused Nwafo greatly. He had an image in his mind of this mans wives and children sitting quietly with their hands between their laps. And yours? he asked Ezeulu. Nobody has died. Do they say that Obika was whipped by the white man? Ezeulu opened both palms to the sky and said nothing. What did they say was his offence? My friend, let us talk about other things. There was a time when a happening such as this would have given me a fever; but that time has passed. Nothing is anything to me any more. Go and ask your mother to bring me a kolanut, Nwafo. She was saying this morning that her kolanuts were finished. Arrow of God 95 Go and ask Matefi then. Must you worry about kolanuts every time? I am not a stranger. I was not taught that kolanut was the food of strangers, said Ezeulu. And besides do not our people say that he is a fool who treats his brother worse than a stranger? But I know what you are afraid of; they tell me you have lost all your teeth. As he said this he reached for a lump of white clay in a four-sided wooden bowl shaped like the head of a lizard and rolled it on the floor towards Akuebue who picked it up and drew four upright lines with it on the floor. Then he painted the big toe of his right foot and rolled the chalk back to Ezeulu and he put it away again in the wooden bowl. Nwafo was soon back with a kolanut in another bowl. Show it to Akuebue, said his father. I have seen it, replied Akuebue. Then break it. No. The king's kolanut returns to his hands. If you say so. Indeed I say so. Ezeulu took the bowl from Nwafo and set it down between his legs. Then he picked up the kolanut in his right hand and offered a prayer. He jerked the hand forward as he said each sentence, his palm open upwards and the thumb holding down the kolanut on the four fingers. Okbuefi Akuebue, may you live, and all your people. I too will live with all my people. But life alone is not enough. May we have the things with which to live it well. For there is a kind of slow and weary life which is worse than death. You speak the truth. May good confront the man on top and the man below. But let him who is jealous of anothers position choke with his envy. So be it. May good come to the land of Igbo and to the country of the riverain folk. Then he broke the kolanut by pressing it between his palms and threw all the lobes into the bowl on the floor. O 0-0 0-0 o 0-0, he whistled. Look what has happened here. The spirits want to eat. 96 CHINUA ACHEBE Akuebue craned his neck to see. One, two, three, four, five, six. Indeed they want to eat. Ezeulu picked up one lobe and threw it outside. Then he picked up another one and put it into his mouth. Nwafo came forward, took the bowl from the floor and served Akuebue. For a short while neither man spoke, only the sound of kolanut as it was crushed between the teeth broke the silence. It is strange the way kolanuts behave, said Ezeulu after he had swallowed twice. I do not remember when I last saw one with six lobes. It is indeed very rare, and you only see it when you are not looking for it. Even five is not common. Some years ago I had to buy four or five basketfuls of kolanuts before I could find one with five lobes for a sacrifice. Nwafo, go to your mothers hut and bring me a big calabash of cold water. . . . This type of heat is not emptyhanded. I think there is water in the sky, said Ezeulu. It is the heat before rain. As he said this he rose three-quarters erect and walked a few steps to his bamboo bed and took from it his goatskin bag. This bag was sewn together with great cunning; it looked as though the goat which lived in it had been pulled out as one might pull out a snail from its shell. It had four short legs and the tail was intact. Ezeulu took the bag to his seat and began to search arm-deep for his bottle of snuff. When he found it he put it down on the floor and began to look for the small ivory spoon. He soon found that also, and he put the bag away beside him. He took up the little white bottle again, held it up to see how much snuff there was left and then tapped it on his kneecap. He opened the bottle and tipped a little of the content into his left palm. Give me a little of that thing to clear my head, said Akuebue who had just drunk his water. Come and get it, replied Ezeulu. You do not expect me to provide the snuff and also the walking around, to give you a wife and find you a mat to sleep on. Akuebue rose half-erect with his right hand on the knee and the left palm opened towards Ezeulu. I will not dispute with you, he said. You have the yam and you have the knife. Ezeulu transferred two spoonfuls of the snuff from his own palm Arrow of God 97 into Akuebues and then brought out some more from the bottle for himself. It is good snuff, said Akuebue. One of his nostrils carried brown traces of the powder. He took another small heap from his cupped left hand on to his right thumbnail and guided it to the other nostril, throwing his head back and sniffing three or four times. Then he had traces on both nostrils. Ezeulu used the ivory spoon instead of his thumbnail. I do not buy my snuff in the market, said Ezeulu; that is why. Edogo came in dangling a calabash of palm wine from a short rope tied round its neck. He saluted Akuebue and his father and set down the calabash. I did not know that you had palm wine, said Ezeulu. It has just been sent by the owner of the door I am carving. And why do you bring it in the presence of this my friend who took over the stomach of all his dead relatives? But I have not heard Edogo say it was meant for you. He turned to Edogo and asked: Or did you say so? Edogo laughed and said it was meant for two of them. Akuebue brought out a big cows horn from his bag and hit it thrice on the floor. Then he rubbed its edges with his palm to remove dirt. Ezeulu brought out his horn from the bag beside him and held it for Edogo to fill. When he had served him he took the calabash to Akuebue and also filled his horn. Before they drank Ezeulu and Akuebue tipped a little on to the floor and muttered a barely audible invitation to their fathers. My body is full of aches, said Ezeulu, and I do not think that palm wine is good for me yet. I can tell you it is not, said Akuebue who had gulped down the first horn and screwed up his face as though waiting for a sound inside his head to tell him whether it was good wine or not. Edogo took his fathers horn from him and filled himself a measure. Oduche came in then, saluted his father and Akuebue and sat down with Nwafo on the mud-seat. Since he joined the white mans religion he always wore a loincloth of towelling material instead of the thin strip of cloth between the legs. Edogo filled the horn again and offered him but he did not drink. What about you, Nwafo? asked Edogo. He also said no. 98 CHINUA ACHEBE When is it you are going to Okperi? Ezeulu asked. The day after tomorrow. For how long? They say for two markets. Ezeulu seemed to be turning this over in his mind. What are you going for? asked Akuebue. They want to test our knowledge of the holy book. Akuebue shrugged his shoulders. I am not sure that you will go, said Ezeulu. But let the days pass and I shall decide. Nobody said anything in reply. Oduche knew enough about his father not to protest. Akuebue drank another horn of wine and began to gnash his teeth. The voice he had been waiting for had spoken and pronounced the wine good. He knocked the horn on the floor a few times and prayed as he did so. May the man who tapped this wine have life to continue his good work. May those of us who drank it also have life. The land of Olu and the land of Igbo. He rubbed the edges of his horn before putting it away in his bag. Drink one horn more, said Edogo. Akuebue rubbed his mouth with the back of his hand before replying. The only medicine against palm wine is the power to say no. This statement seemed to bring Ezeulu back to the people around him. Before you came in, he said to Akuebue, I was telling that little boy over there that the greatest liar among men still speaks the truth to his own son. It is so, said Akuebue. A man can swear before the most dreaded deity on what his father told him. If a man is not sure of the boundary between his land and his neighbours, continued Ezeulu, he tells his son: I think it is here but if there is a dispute do not swear before a deity.  It is even so, said Akuebue. But when a man has spoken the truth and his children prefer to take the lie . . . His voice had risen with every word towards the dangerous pitch of a curse; then he broke off with a violent shake of the head. When he began again he spoke more quietly. That is why a stranger can whip a son of mine and go unscathed, because my son has nailed up his ear against my words. Were it not so that stranger would Arrow of God 99 already have learnt what it was to cross Ezeulu; dogs would have licked his eyes. I would have swallowed him whole and brought him up again. I would have shaved his head without wetting the hair/ Did Obika strike the first blow then? asked Akuebue. How do I know? All I can say is that he was blind with palm wine when he left here in the morning. And even when he came back a short while ago it had still not cleared from his eyes. But they say he did not strike the first blow, said Edogo. Were you there? asked his father. Or would you swear before a deity on the strength of what a drunken man tells you? If I was sure of my son do you think I would sit here now talking to you while a man who pokes his finger into my eyes goes home to his bed? If I did nothing else I would pronounce a few words on him and he would know the power in my mouth. The perspiration was forming on his brow. What you say is true, said Akuebue. But in my thinking there is still something for us to do once we find out from those who saw it whether Obika struck the first blow or . . . Ezeulu did not let him finish. Why should I go out looking for strangers to tell me what my son did or did not do? I should be telling them. That is true. But let us first chase away the wild cat, afterwards we blame the hen. Akuebue turned to Edogo. Where is Obika himself? It appears that what I said has not entered your ear, said Ezeulu. Where . . . Edogo interrupted him. He went out with Ofoedu. He went out because our father did not ask him what happened before blaming him. This unexpected accusation stung Ezeulu like the black ant. But he held himself together and, to everybodys surprise, leaned back against the wall and shut his eyes. When he opened them again he began to whistle quietly to himself. Akuebue nodded his head four or five times like a man who had uncovered an unexpected truth. Ezeulu moved his head slightly from side to side and up and down to his almost silent whistling. This is what I tell my own children, said Akuebue to Edogo and the two boys. I tell them that a man always has more sense than his IOO CHINUA ACHEBE children. It was clear he said this to mollify Ezeulu; but at the same time it was clear he spoke truth. Those of you who think they are wiser than their father forget that it is from a mans own stock of sense that he gives out to his sons. That is why a boy who tries to wrestle with his father gets blinded by the old mans loin-cloth. Why do I speak like this? It is because I am not a stranger in your fathers hut and I am not afraid to speak my mind. I know how often your father has pleaded with Obika to leave his friendship with Ofoedu. Why has Obika not heeded? It is because you allnot only Obika but you all, including that little one thereyou think you are wiser than your father. My own children are like that. But there is one thing which you all forget. You forget that a woman who began cooking before another must have more broken utensils. When we old people speak it is not because of the sweetness of words in our mouth; it is because we see something which you do not see. Our fathers made a proverb about it. They said that when we see an old woman stop in her dance to point again and again in the same direction we can be sure that somewhere there something happened long ago which touched the roots of her life. When Obika returns tell him what I say, Edogo. Do you hear me? Edogo nodded. He was wondering whether it was true that a man never spoke a lie to his sons. Akuebue wheeled round on his buttocks and faced Ezeulu. It is the pride of Umuaro, he said, that we never see one party as right and the other wrong. I have spoken to the children and I shall not be afraid to speak to you. I think you are too hard on Obika. Apart from your high position as Chief Priest you are also blessed with a great compound. But in all great compounds there must be people of all mindssome good, some bad, some fearless and some cowardly; those who bring in wealth and those who scatter it, those who give good advice and those who only speak the words of palm wine. That is why we say that whatever tune you play in the compound of a great man there is always someone to dance to it. I salute you. Although Tony Clarke had already spent nearly six weeks in Okperi most of his luggage, including his crockery, had arrived only a fortnight agoin fact the day before he went on tour to the bush. That was why he had not been able until now to ask Captain Winterbottom to his house for a meal. As he waited the arrival of his guest Mr. Clarke felt not a little uneasy. One of the problems of living in a place like this with only four other Europeans (three of whom were supposed to be beneath the notice of Political Officers) was that one had to cope with a guest like Winterbottom absolutely alone. Of course this was not their first social encounter; they had in fact had dinner together not very long ago and things did not altogether grind to a stop. But then Clarke had been guest, without any responsibilities. Today he was going to be host and the onus would rest on him to keep the conversation alive, through the long, arduous ritual of alcohol, food, coffee and more alcohol stretching into midnight. If only he could have invited someone like John 102 CHINUA ACHEBE Wright with whom he had struck up a kind of friendship during his recent tour. But such a thing would have been disastrous. Clark had shared the lonely thatched-roof Rest House outside Umuaro with Wright for one night during his tour. Wright had been living in one half of the Rest House for over two weeks then. The Rest House consisted of two enormous rooms each with a camp-bed and an old mosquito-net, a rough wooden table and chair and a cupboard. Just behind the main building there was a thatched shed used as a kitchen. About thirty yards away another hut stood over a dug latrine and wooden seat. Farther away still in the same direction a third hut in very bad repair housed the servants and porters who were sometimes called hammock boys. The Rest House proper was surrounded by a ragged hedge of a native plant which Clarke had never seen anywhere else. The entire appearance of the place showed that it had not had a caretaker since the last one vanished into the bush with two camp-beds. The beds were replaced but the key to the main building and the latrine was thereafter kept at headquarters so that whenever a European was going on tour and needed to lodge there the native Chief Clerk in Captain Winterbottoms office had to remember to give the key to his head porter or steward. Once when the Police Officer, Mr. Wade, had been going to Umuaro the Chief Clerk had forgotten to do this and had had to walk the six or seven miles at night to deliver it. Fortunately for him Mr. Wade had not suffered any personal inconveniences as he had sent his boys one day ahead of himself to clean the place up. As he walked round the premises of the Rest House Tony Clarke felt that he was hundreds of miles from Government Hill. It was quite impossible to believe that it was only six or seven miles away. Even the sun seemed to set in a different direction. No wonder the natives were said to regard a six mile walk as travelling to a foreign country. Later that evening he and Wright sat on the veranda of the Rest House to drink Wrights gin. In this remote corner, far from the stiff atmosphere of Winterbottoms Government Hill, Clarke was able to discover that he liked Wright very much. He also discovered to his somewhat delighted amazement that in certain circumstances he could contain as much gin as any Old Coaster. Arrow of God 103 They had only met for very brief moments before. But now they talked like old friends. Clarke thought that for all the other mans squat and rough exterior he was a good and honest Englishman. He found it so refreshing to be talking to a man who did not have the besetting sin of smugness, of taking himself too seriously. What do you think the Captain would say, Tony, if he were to see his young Political Officer being nice and friendly to a common roadmaker? His big red face looked almost boyish. I dont know and dont much care, said Clarke, and because the fume of gin was already working on his brain, he added: I shall be happy if in all my years in Africa I succeed in building something as good as your road. ... Its good of you to say so. Are we having a celebration to open it? The Captain says no. He says we have already overspent the Vote for it. What does it matter? Thats what I want to know. And yet we spend hundreds of pounds building Native Courts all over the division that nobody wants, as far as I can see. I must say though that that is not the Captains fault. Clarke was already adopting Wrights half-contemptuous manner of referring to Winterbottom. It is the policy of Headquarters which I happen to know the Captain is not altogether in agreement with. Damn the Headquarters. The Captain would approve of that sentiment. Actually, you know, the Captain is not a bad fellow at all. I think that deep down he is quite a decent fellow. One must make allowances for the rough time hes had. In the matter of promotions, you mean? Hes been badly treated there too, Im told, said Wright. Actually I wasnt thinking of that at all. I was thinking of his domestic life. Oh yes. You see during the war while the poor man was fighting the Germans in the Cameroons some smart fellow walked away with his wife at home. Really? I hadnt heard about that. Yes. Im told he was very badly shaken by it. I sometimes think it 104 CHINUA ACHEBE was this personal loss during the war thats made him cling to this ridiculous Captain business. Quite possibly. Hes the kind of person, isnt he, who would take the desertion of his wife very badly, said Clarke. Exactly. A man as inflexible as him cant take a thing like that. In the course of the evening Clarke was given every detail of Winterbottoms marital crisis and he felt really sorry for the man. Wright also seemed to have been touched with sympathy by the very act of telling the story. Without any conscious design the two men dropped their contemptuous reference to the Captain and called Winterbottom by his name. The real trouble with Winterbottom, said Wright after deep thought, is that he is too serious to sleep with native women. Clarke was startled out of his own thoughts, and for a brief moment he completely forgot about Winterbottom. On more than one occasion during his present tour he had come up in his mind against the question: How widespread was the practice of white men sleeping with native women? He doesnt seem to realize that even Governors have been known to keep dusky mistresses. He licked his lips. I dont think its a question of knowing or not knowing, said Clarke. He is a man of very high principles, something of a missionary. I believe his father was a Church of England clergyman, which is a far cry from my father, for instance, who is a Bank of England clerical. They both laughed heartily at this. When Clarke recalled this piece of wit in the morning he realized how much alcohol he must have drunk to find such an inferior joke so amusing. I think you are right about the missionary business. He should have come out with the C.M.S. or some such people. By the way, he has been going around lately with the woman missionary doctor at Nkisa. Of course we all have our different tastes, but I would not have thought a woman missionary doctor could provide much fun for a man in this God-forsaken place. Clarke wanted to ask about native womenwhether they were better than whites, and many other detailsbut not even the effect of the gin could bring out the questions. Rather he found himself changing the subject and losing this great opportunity. The thoughts he had Arrow of God 105 had since first seeing fully grown girls going about naked were again forced to sleep. Later he would bite his lips in regret. From what I heard of Winterbottom at headquarters, he said, I expected to see some sort of buffoon. I know. He is a stock joke at Enugu, isnt he? Whenever I said I was going to Okperi they said: What! With Old TomP and looked pityingly at me. I wondered what was wrong with Old Tom, but no one would say any more. Then one day a very senior officer said to another to my hearing: Old Tom is always reminding you that he came out to Nigeria in 1910 but he never mentions that in all that time he has not put in a days work. Its simply amazing how much back-biting goes on at Enugu. Well, said Wright, yawning, I cannot say myself that Old Tom is the most hard-working man Ive ever met; but then who is? Certainly not that lot at Enugu. All this was working on Clarkes mind as he awaited Winterbottoms coming. He felt guilty like one who had been caught back-biting one of his own group with an outsider. But then, he told himself in defence, they had said nothing that could be called uncharitable about Winterbottom. All that had happened was that he got to know a few details about the mans life, and felt sorry for him. And that feeling justified the knowledge. He went into the kitchen for the tenth time that evening to see how Cook was roasting the chicken over a wood fire. It would be terrible if it turned out as tough as the last one Clarke had eaten. Of course all native chicken was tough and very small. But perhaps one shouldnt complain. A fully grown cock cost no more than twopence. Even so one wouldnt mind paying a little more now and again for a good, juicy, English chicken. The look on Cooks face seemed to say that Clarke was coming into the kitchen too frequently. How is it coming? Ide try small small, said Cook, rubbing his smoke-inflamed eyes with his forearm. Clarke looked around vaguely and returned to the veranda of his bungalow. He sat down and looked at his watch again; it was quarter to sevena full half-hour to go. He began to think up a number of subjects for conversation. His recent tour would have provided enough topics for the evening, but he had just written and submitted a full report on it. Io6 CHINUA ACHEBE But this is funny, he told himself. Why should he feel so nervous because Winterbottom was coming to dinner? Was he afraid of the man? Certainly not! Why all the excitement then? Why should he get so worked up about meeting Winterbottom simply because Wright had told him a few background stories which were in any case common knowledge? From this point Clarke speculated briefly on the nature of knowledge. Did knowledge of ones friends and colleagues impose a handicap on one? Perhaps it did. If so it showed how false was the common assumption that the more facts you could get about others the greater your power over them. Perhaps facts put you at a great disadvantage; perhaps they made you feel sorry and even responsible. Clarke rose to his feet and walked up and down, rather self-consciously. Perhaps this was the real difference between British and French colonial administrations. The French made up their minds about what they wanted to do and did it. The British, on the other hand, never did anything without first sending out a Commission of Inquiry to discover all the facts, which then ham-strung them. He sat down again, glowing with satisfaction. The dinner was almost entirely satisfactory. There were only two or three uneasy moments throughout the evening; for example when Captain Winterbottom said at the beginning: I have just been reading your report on your tour. One could see that you are settling down nicely to your duties. It was all so exciting, said Clarke, attempting to minimize his part in the success story. Its such a wonderful division. I can imagine how you must feel seeing such a happy district growing up under your direction. He had stopped himself just in time from saying your wise direction. Even so he wondered whether this rather obvious attempt to return compliment for compliment was altogether happy. One thing worries me, though, said Winterbottom without any indication that he even heard Clarkes last piece. You say in the report that after careful inquiry you were satisfied that there was no truth in all the stories of Wright whipping natives. Clarkes heart fell. This was the one falsehood in the entire report. In fact he completely forgot to make any inquires, even if he had known how to set about it. It was only on his return to Okperi that he found a brief, late entry Wright & natives scribbled in pencil on the second page of his touring notebook. Arrow of God 107 At first he had worried over it; then he had come to the conclusion that if Wright had in fact been employing unorthodox methods he would have heard of it without making inquiries as such. But since he had heard nothing it was safe to say that the stories were untrue. In any case how did one investigate such a thing? Did one go up to the first native one saw and ask if he had been birched by Wright? Or did one ask Wright? From what Clarke had seen of the man he would not have thought he was that sort. My steward is a native of Umuaro, continued Winterbottom, and has just come back after spending two days at home; and he tells me that the whole village was in confusion because a rather important man had been whipped by Wright. But perhaps theres nothing in it. Clarke hoped he did not betray his confusion. Anyhow he rallied quickly and said: I heard nothing of it on the spot. The words on the spot stung Winterbottom like three wasps. The fellows cheek! He had been there barely a week and already he was talking as though he owned the district and Winterbottom was the new boy, or some deskridden idiot at headquarters. On the spot indeed! But he chose not to press the matter. He was immersed in his plans for appointing two new Paramount Chiefs in the division and throughout dinner he spoke of nothing else. Clarke was surprised that he no longer spoke with strong' feeling. As he watched him across the table he seemed too tired and old. But even that soon passed and a hint of enthusiasm returned to his voice. I think I told you the story of the fetish priest who impressed me most favourably by speaking the truth in the land case between these people here and Umuaro. Yes, I think you did. Clarke was nervously watching his guest in difficulty with a piece of chicken. These damned native birds! Well, I have now decided to appoint him Paramount Chief for Umuaro. Ive gone through the records of the case again and found that the mans title is Eze Ulu. The prefix eze in Ibo means king. So the man is a kind of priest-king. That means, I suppose, said Clarke, that the new appointment would not altogether be strange to him. Exactly. Although I must say that I have never found the Ibo man backward in acquiring new airs of authority. Take this libertine we made Chief here. He now calls himself His Highness Obi Ikedi the Io8 CHINUA ACHEBE First of Okperi. The only title I havent yet heard him use is Fidei Defensor.  Clarke opened his mouth to say that the love of title was a universal human failing but thought better of it. The man was a complete nonentity until we crowned him, and now he carries on as though he had been nothing else all his life. Its the same with Court Clerks and even messengers. They all manage to turn themselves into little tyrants over their own people. It seems to be a trait in the character of the negro. The steward in shining white moved out of the darkness of the kitchen balancing the rest of the boiled potatoes and cauliflower on one hand and the chicken on the other. His heavily starched uniform crackled as he walked over and stood silently on Captain Winterbottoms right. Go over to the other side, Stephen, said Clarke irritably. Stephen grinned and moved over. No. I wont have another, said Winterbottom, and turning to Clarke he added: This is very good; one is not usually so lucky with the first cook he gets. Aloysius is not first rate, but I suppose . . . No, I wont have any more, Stephen. As they ate fresh fruit salad made from pawpaw, banana and oranges Winterbottom returned to his Paramount Chiefs. So as far as Umuaro is concerned I have found their Chief, he said with one of his rare smiles, and they will live happily ever after. I am not so optimistic about Abame who are a pretty wild set anyhow. They are the people who murdered Macdonald? asked Clarke, half of whose mind was on the salad that had gone a little sour. Thats right. Actually theyre no longer very troublesomenot to us anyhow; the punitive expedition taught them a pretty unforgettable lesson. But they are still very uncooperative. In the whole division they are the least co-operative with their Native Court. Throughout last year the court handled less than a dozen cases and not one was brought to it by the natives themselves. Thats pretty grim, said Clarke without being sure whether he meant it to be ironical or not. But as Winterbottom began to fill in the details of his plans for the two Native Court Areas Clarke could not help being impressed by a new aspect of the mans character. Having Arrow of God 109 been overruled in his opposition to Paramount Chiefs he was now sparing no effort to ensure the success of the policy. Clarkes tutor in Morals at Cambridge had been fond of the phrase crystallization of civilization. This was it. Over their after-coffee whisky and soda Captain Winterbottoms opposition reared its head momentarily. But that only confirmed Clarkes new opinion of him. What I find so heart-rending, said Winterbottom, is not so much the wrong policies of our Administration as our lack of consistency. Take this question of Paramount Chiefs. When Sir Hugh Macdermot first arrived as Governor he sent his Secretary for Native Affairs to investigate the whole business. The fellow came over here and spent a long time discovering the absurdities of the system which I had pointed out all along. Anyhow, from what he said in private conversation it was clear that he agreed with us that it had been an unqualified disaster. That was in 1919. I remember I had just come back from leave . . . Some strange emotion entered his voice and Clarke saw a rush of blood to his face. He mastered himself and continued: More than two years and we still have heard nothing about the mans report. On the contrary the Lieutenant-Governor now asks us to proceed with the previous policy. Where does anyone stand? It is very frustrating, said Clarke. You know I was thinking the other day about our love of Commissions of Inquiry. That seems to me to be the real difference between us and the French. They know what they want and do it. We set up a commission to discover all the facts, as though facts meant anything. We imagine that the more facts we can obtain about our Africans the easier it will be to rule them. But facts . . . Facts are important, cut in Winterbottom, and Commissions of Inquiry could be useful. The fault of our Administration is that they invariably appoint the wrong people and set aside the advice of those of us who have been here for years. Clarke felt impotent anger with the man for not letting him finish, and personal inadequacy for not having made the point as beautifully as he had first made it to himself. The first time Ezeulu left his compound after the Pumpkin Festival was to visit his friend, Akuebue. He found him sitting on the floor of his obi preparing seed-yams which he had hired labourers to plant for him next morning. He sat with a short, wooden-headed knife between two heaps of yams. The bigger heap lay to his right on the bare floor. The smaller pile was in a long basket from which he took out one yam at a time, looked at it closely, trimmed it with his knife and put it in the big heap. The refuse lay directly in front of him, between the heapslarge numbers of brown, circular yam-skins chipped off the tail of each seedyam, and grey, premature tendrils trimmed off the heads. The two men shook hands and Ezeulu took his rolled goatskin from under his arm, spread it on the floor and sat down. Akuebue asked him about his family and for a while continued to work on his yams. They are well, replied Ezeulu. And the people of your compound? They are quiet. Arrow of God 111 Those are very large and healthy seed-yams. Do they come from your own barn or from the market? Do you not know that my portion of the Anietiti land . . . ? Yes. They were harvested there. It is a great land, said Ezeulu, nodding his head a few times. Such a land makes lazy people look like master farmers. Akuebue smiled. You want to draw me out, but you wont. He put down the knife and raised his voice to call his son, Obielue, who answered from the inner compound and soon came in, sweating. Ezeulu! he saluted. My son. He turned to his father to take his message. Tell your mother that Ezeulu is greeting her. If she has kolanut let her bring it. Obielue returned to the inner compound. Although I ate no kolanut the last time I went to the house of my friend. Akuebue said this as though he talked to himself. Ezeulu laughed. What do we say happens to the man who eats and then makes his mouth as if it has never seen food? How should I know? It makes his anus dry up. Did your mother not tell you that? Akuebue rose to his feet very slowly because of the pain in his waist. Old age is a disease, he said, struggling to unbend himself with one hand on the hip. When he was three-quarters erect he gave up. Whenever I sit for any length of time I have to practise again to walk, like an infant. He smiled as he toddled to the low entrance wall of his obi, took from it a wooden bowl with a lump of chalk in it and offered it to his guest. Ezeulu picked up the chalk and drew five lines with it on the floorthree uprights, a flat one across the top and another below them. Then he painted one of his big toes and dubbed a thin coat of white around his left eye. Only one of Akuebues two wives was at home and she soon came into the obi to salute Ezeulu and to say that the senior wife had gone to inspect her palm trees for ripe fruit. Obielue returned with a kolanut. He took the wooden bowl from his father, blew into it to remove dust and offered the kolanut in it to Ezeulu. Thank you, said Ezeulu. Take it to your father to break. No, said Akuebue. I ask you to break it. I 12 CHINUA ACHEBE That cannot be. We do not by-pass a man and enter his compound. I know that, said Akuebue, but you see that my hands are full and I am asking you to perform the office for me. A man cannot be too busy to break the first kolanut of the day in his own house. So put the yam down; it will not run away. But this is not the first kolanut of the day. I have broken several already. That may be so, but you did not break them in my presence. The time a man wakes up is his morning. All right, said Akuebue. I shall break it if you say so. Indeed I say So. We do not apply an ear-pick to the eye. Akuebue took the kolanut in his hand and said: We shall both live, and broke it. Two gunshots had sounded in the neighbourhood since Ezeulu came in. Now a third went off. What is happening there? he asked. Are men leaving the forest now to hunt in the compounds? Oh. You have not heard? Ogbuefi Amalu is very sick. True? And it has reached the point of shooting guns? Yes. Akuebue lowered his voice out of respect for the bad story. What day was yesterday? Eke, replied Ezeulu. Yes, it was on the other Eke that it happened. He was returning home from the farmland he had gone to clear when it struck him down. Before he reached home he was trembling with cold in the noonday heat. He could no longer hold his matchet because his fingers were set like crooks. What do they say it is? From what I saw this morning and yesterday I think it is aru-mmo.  Please do not repeat it. But I am not telling you that Nwokonkwo or Nwokafo told me. This is what I saw with my own eyes. Ezeulu began to gnash his teeth. I went to see him this morning. His breath seemed to be scraping his sides with a blunt razor. Who have they hired to make medicine for him? asked Ezeulu. A man called Nwodika from Umuofia. I told them this morning Arrow of God 113 that had I been there when they took the decision I would have told them to go straight to Aninta. There is a doctor there who nips off sickness between his thumb and finger. But if it is the sickness of the Spirits, as you say, there is no medicine for itexcept camwood and fire. That is so, said Akuebue, but we cannot put our hands between our laps and watch a sick man for twelve days. We must grope about until what must happen does happen. That is why I spoke of this medicine-man from Aninta. I think you speak of Aghadike whom they call Anyanafummo. You know him. That is the very man. I know many people throughout Olu and Igbo. Aghadike is a great doctor and diviner. But even he cannot carry a battle to the compound of the great god. No man can do that. The gun sounded again. This gun-shooting is no more than a foolish groping about, said Ezeulu. How can we frighten Spirits away with the noise of a gun? If it were so easy any man who had enough money to buy a keg of gunpowder would live and live until mushrooms sprouted from his head. If I am sick and they bring me a medicine-man who knows more about hunting than herbs I shall send him away and look for another. The two men sat for a little while in silence. Then Akuebue said: From what I saw this morning we may hear something before another dawn. Ezeulu moved his head up and down many times. It is a story of great sorrow, but we cannot set fire to the world. Akuebue who had stopped working on his yams went back to them now with the proverbial excuse that greeting in the cold harmattan is taken from the fireside. That is what our people say, replied Ezeulu. And they also say that a man who visits a craftsman at work finds a sullen host. The gun sounded yet again. It seemed to make Ezeulu irritable. I shall go over and tell the man that if he has no medicine to give to the sick man he should at least spare the gunpowder they will use for his funeral. Perhaps he thinks that gunpowder is as cheap as wood ash, said Akuebue, and then more seriously: If you go there on your way 114 CHINUA ACHEBE home say nothing that might make them think you wish their kinsman evil. They may say: What is gunpowder to a mans life? Ezeulu did not need two looks at the sick man to see that he could not pass the twelve days which the Spirits gave a man stricken with this disease. If, as Akuebue had said, nothing was heard by tomorrow it would be a thing to tell. The mans trunk was encased in a thick coat of camwood ointment which had caked and cracked in countless places. A big log fire burned beside the bamboo bed on which he lay and a strong whiff of burning herbs was in the air. His breathing was like the splitting of hard wood. He did not recognize Ezeulu who on entering had greeted those in the room with his eyes alone and made straight for the bedside where he stood for a long time looking down on the sick man in silence. After that he went and sat down with the small crowd of relations talking in very low voices. What has a man done to merit this? he asked. That is what we all have been asking, replied one of the men. We were not told to expect it. We woke up one morning to find our shinbone deformed. The herbalist sat a little apart from the group, and took no part in the conversation. Ezeulu looked around the room and saw how the man had fortified it against the entry of the Spirits. From the roof hung down three long gourds corked with wads of dry banana leaf. A fourth gourd was the big-bellied type which was often used for carrying palm wine. It hung directly over the sick man. On its neck was a string of cowries, and a bunch of parrots feathers danced inside it with only their upper half showing. It looked as if something boiled about their feet forcing them to gyrate around the mouth of the gourd. Two freshly sacrificed chicks dangled head downwards on either side of it. The sick man who had been silent except for his breathing began quite suddenly to groan. Everyone stopped talking. The medicineman, a ring of white chalked dubbed round one eye and a large leather-covered amulet on his left wrist, rose up and went outside. His flint-gun lay at the threshold, its base on the ground and the barrel pointing into the hut. He picked it up and began to load. The gunpowder was contained in a four-cornered bottle which had once carried the white mans hot drink called Nje-nje. When he had loaded the gun he Arrow of God t 115 went to the back of the house and let it off. All the cocks and hens in the neighbourhood immediately set up an alarm as if they had seen a wild animal. When he returned to the hut he found the sick man even more restless, saying meaningless things. Bring me his ofo,  he said. The sick mans brother took the short wooden staff from the houseshrine held by ropes to a rafter. The medicine-man who was now crouching by the bed took it from him and opening the sick mans right hand put it there. Hold it! he commanded pressing the dry fingers round the staff. Grasp it, and say no to them! Do you hear me? Say no! The meaning of his command seemed at last to seep through many clogged filters to the sick mans mind and the fingers began to close, like claws, slowly round the staff. Thats right, said the medicine-man beginning to remove his own hand and to leave the ofo in Amalus grasp. Say no to them! But as soon as he took his hand completely away Amalus fingers jerked open and the ofo fell down on the floor. The little crowd in the hut exchanged meaningful glances but no words. Soon after Ezeulu rose to go. Take good care of him, he said. Go well, replied the others. When Obikas bride arrived with her people and he looked upon her again it surprised him greatly that he had been able to let her go untouched during her last visit. He knew that few other young men of his age would have shown the same restraint which ancient custom demanded. But what was right was right. Obika began to admire this new image of himself as an upholder of customlike the lizard who fell down from the high iroko tree he felt entitled to praise himself if nobody else did. The bride was accompanied by her mother who was just coming out of an illness, many girls of her own age and her mothers women friends. Most of the women carried small headloads of the brides dowry to which they had all contributedcooking-pots, wooden bowls, brooms, mortar, pestle, baskets, mats, ladles, pots of palm oil, baskets of cocoyam, smoked fish, fermented cassava, locust beans, heads of salt and pepper. There were also two lengths of cloth, two I 16 CHINUA ACHEBE plates and an iron pot. These last were products of the white man and had been bought at the new trading store at Okperi. The three compounds of Ezeulu and his sons were already full of relatives and friends before the bride and her people arrived. The twenty or so young maidens attending her were all fully decorated. But the bride stood out among them. It was not only that she was taller than any of them, she was altogether more striking in her looks and carriage. She wore a different coiffure befitting her imminent transition to full womanhooda plait rather than regular patterns made with a razor. The girls sang a song called Ifeoma. Goodly Thing had come, they said, so let everyone who had good things bring them before her as offering. They made a circle round her and she danced to their song. As she danced her husband-to-be and other members of Ezeulus family broke through the circle one or two at a time and stuck money on her forehead. She smiled and let the present fall at her feet from where one of the girls picked it up and put it in a bowl. The brides name was Okuata. In tallness she took after her father who came of a race of giants. Her face was finely cut and some people already called her Oyilidie because she resembled her husband in comeliness. Her full breasts had a very slight upward curve which would save them from falling and sagging too soon. Her hair was done in the new otimili fashion. There were eight closely woven ridges of hair running in perfect lines from the nape to the front of the head and ending in short upright tufts like a garland of thick bristles worn on the hair-line from ear to ear. She wore as many as fifteen strings of jigida on her waist. Most of them were bloodcoloured but two or three were black, and some of the blood-coloured strings had been made up with a few black discs thrown in. Tomorrow she would tie a loincloth like a full-grown woman and henceforth her body would be concealed from the public gaze. The strings of jigida clinked as she danced. Behind they covered all her waist and the upper part of her buttocks. In front they lay string upon string from under her navel to her genitals, covering the greater part and providing a dark shade for the rest. The other girls were dressed in the same way except that most of them wore fewer strings o{jigida. The feasting which followed lasted till sunset. There were pots of yam pottage, foofoo, bitter-leaf soup and egusi soup, two boiled legs of Arrow of God 117 goat, two large bowls of cooked asa fish taken out whole from the soup and kegs of sweet wine tapped from the raffia palm. Whenever a particularly impressive item of food was set before the women their song-leader raised the old chant of thanks:  Kwo-kwo-kwo-kwo-kwo! Kwo-o-o-oh! We are going to eat again as we are wont to do! Who provides? Who is it? Who provides? Who is it? Obika Ezeulu he provides Ayo-o-o-o-o-oh! But in the end her mother and all the protecting company from her village set out for home again leaving her behind. Okuata felt like an orphan child and tears came down her face. Her mother-in-law took her away into her hut where she would stay until the Sacrifice at the crossroads was performed. The medicine-man and diviner who had been hired to perform the rite soon arrived and the party set out. In it were Obika, his elder halfbrother, his mother and the bride. Ezeulu did not go with them because he rarely left his obi after dark. Oduche refused to go so as not to offend the Catechist who preached against sacrifices. They made for the highway leading to Umuezeani, the village where the bride came from. It was now quite dark and there was no moon. The palm-oil lamp which Obikas mother carried gave little light especially as she had to cup one hand round the wick to protect the flame from the wind. Even so it was blown out twice and she had to go into nearby compounds to light it againfirst into Anosis compound and then into the hut of Membolus widow. The medicine-man whose name was Aniegboka walked silently in front of the group. He was a small man but when he spoke he raised his voice as one might do in talking over the compound wall to a neighbour who was hard of hearing. Aniegboka was not one of the famous medicine-men in the clan; he was chosen because he was friendly with Ezeulus compound and besides the sacrifice he was going to perform did not call for exceptional skill. Children in all the 118 CHINUA ACHEBE neighbourhood knew him and fled on his approach because they said he could turn a person into a dog by slapping him on the buttocks. But they made fun of him when he was not there because one of his eyes was like a bad cowry. According to the story the eye was damaged by the sharpened end of a banana shaft which Aniegbokathen a little boywas throwing up and catching again in mid-air. As the group walked in the dark they passed a few people but only recognized them from their voice when they spoke a greeting. The weak light of the oil lamp seemed to deepen the darkness around them making it difficult for them to see others as easily as they themselves were seen. There was a soft but constant clatter coming from the big skin bag slung on Aniegbokas shoulder. The bride had a bowl of fired clay in one hand and a hen in the other. Now and again the hen squawked the way hens do when their pen is disturbed by an intruder at night. As she walked in the middle of the file Okuata suffered the struggle of happiness and fear in her thoughts. Obika and Edogo who led the way held their matchets. They spoke now and again but Obikas mind was not in what they said. His ear strained to catch the gentlest clinking together of his brides jigida. He could even isolate her footsteps from all the others behind him. He too was anxious. When he took his wife to his hut after the sacrifice, would he find her at homeas the saying was or would he learn with angry humiliation that another had broken in and gone off with his prize? That could not be. Everyone who knew her witnessed to her good behaviour. Obika had already chosen an enormous goat as a present for his mother-in-law should his wife prove to be a virgin. He did not know exactly what he would do if he found that he could not take it to her after all. On his left hand Obika held a very small pot of water by the neck. His half-brother had a bunch of tender palm frond cut from the pinnacle of the tree. Before long they reached the junction of their highway and another leading to the brides village along which she had come that very day. They walked a short distance on this road and stopped. The medicine-man chose a spot in the middle of the way and asked Obika to dig a hole there. Put down the lamp here, he told Obikas mother. She did so and Obika crouched down and began to dig. Arrow of God 119 Make it wider, said the medicine-man. Yes like that. The three men were all in a crouching position; the women knelt on both knees with the trunk erect. The light of the oil lamp burnt with vigour now. Do not dig any more, said the medicine-man. It is now deep enough. Bring out all the loose soil. While Obika was scooping out the red earth with both hands the medicine-man began to bring out the sacrificial objects from his bag. First he brought out four small yams, then four pieces of white chalk and the flower of the wild lily. Give me the omu.  Edogo passed the tender palm leaves to him. He tore out four leaflets and put away the rest. Then he turned to Obikas mother. Let me have ego nano. She untied a bunch of cowries from a corner of her cloth and gave them to him. He counted them carefully on the ground as a woman would before she bought or sold in the market, in groups of six. There were four groups and he nodded his head. He rose to his feet and positioned Okuata beside the hole so that she faced the direction of her village, kneeling on both knees. Then he took his position opposite her on the other side of the hole, with the sacrificial objects ranged on his right. The others stood a little back. He took one of the yams and gave it to Okuata. She waved it round her head and put it inside the hole. The medicine-man put in the other three. Then he gave her one of the pieces of white chalk and she did as for the yam. Then came the palm leaves and the flower of the wild lily and last of all he gave her one group of six cowries which she closed in her palm and did as for the others. After this he pronounced the absolution: Any evil which you might have seen with your eyes, or spoken with your mouth, or heard with your ears or trodden with your feet; whatever your father might have brought upon you or your mother brought upon you, I cover them all here.  As he spoke the last words he took the bowl of fired clay and placed it face downwards over the objects in the hole. Then he began to put back the loose earth. Twice he eased up the bowl slightly so that when he finished its curved back showed a little above the surface of the road. 120 CHINUA ACHEBE Where is the water? he asked. Obikas mother produced the small pot of water. The bride who had now risen to her feet bent down at the waist and tipping the water into her palm began to wash her face, her hands and arms and her feet and legs up to the knee. Do not forget, said the diviner when she had finished, that you are not to pass this way until morning even if the warriors of Abam were to strike this night and you were fleeing for your life. The great god will not let her run for her life, neither today nor tomorrow, said her mother-in-law. We know she will not, said Aniegboka, but we must still do things as they were laid down. Then turning to Obika he said: I have done as you asked me to do. You wife will bear you nine sons. We thank you, said Obika and Edogo together. This hen will follow me home, he said as he slung his bag on one shoulder and picked up the hen by the legs tied together with banana rope. He must have noticed how their eyes went again and again to the fowl. I alone will eat its flesh. Let none of you pay me a visit in the morning because I shall not share it. He laughed very loud, like a drunken man. Even diviners ought to be rewarded now and again. He laughed once more. Do we not say that the flute player must sometimes stop to wipe his nose? That is what we say, replied Edogo. All the way back the medicine-man was full of loud talk. He boasted about the high regard in which, he said, he was held in distant clans. The others listened with one ear and put in a word now and again. The only person who did not open her mouth was Okuata. When they got to Ilo Agbasioso the diviner parted with them and took a turning to the right. As soon as he was out of earshot Obika asked if it was the custom for the diviner to take the hen home. I have heard that some of them do, said his mother. But I have never seen it until today. My own hen was buried with the rest of the sacrifice. I have never heard of it, said Edogo. It seems to me that the man does not get enough custom and is grabbing whatever he sees. Our part was to provide the hen, said Obikas mother, and we have done it. I wanted to put a question to him. Arrow of God 121 No, my son. It is better that you did not. This is not the time to quarrel and dispute. Before Obika and his wife, Okuata, retired to their own compound they went first to salute Ezeulu. Father, is it the custom for the diviner to take home the hen bought for the sacrifice? asked Obika. No, my son. Did Aniegboka do so? He did. I wanted to speak to him but my mother made a sign to me not to talk. It is not the custom. You must know that there are more people with greedy, long throats in the pursuit of medicine than anywhere else. He noticed the look of concern on Obikas face. Take your wife home and do not allow this to trouble you. If a diviner wants to eat the entrails of sacrifice like a vulture the matter lies between him and his chi. You have done your part by providing the animal. When they left him Ezeulu felt his heart warm with pleasure as it had not done for many days. Was Obika already a changed person? It was not like him to come to his father and ask questions with so much care on his face. Akuebue had always said that once Obika had a woman to provide for he would change his ways. Perhaps it was going to be so. Another thought came to Ezeulu to confirm it: in the past Obika would have stood over the diviner and made him bury the hen. He smiled. 12 Although Okuata emerged at dawn feeling awkward and bashful in her unaccustomed loin-cloth it was a very proud bashfulness. She could go without shame to salute her husbands parents because she had been found at home. Her husband was even now arranging to send the goat and other presents to her mother in Umuezeani for giving him an unspoilt bride. She felt greatly relieved for although she had always known she was a virgin she had had a secret fear which sometimes whispered in her ear and made her start. It was the thought of the moonlight play when Obiora had put his penis between her thighs. True, he had only succeeded in playing at the entrance but she could not be too sure. She had not slept very much, not as much as her husband; but she had been happy. Sometimes she tried to forget her happiness and to think how she would have felt had things turned out differently. For many years to come she would have walked like one afraid the earth might bite her. Every girl knew of Ogbanje Omenyi whose husband Arrow of God 123 was said to have sent to her parents for a matchet to cut the bush on either side of the highway which she carried between her thighs. Every child1 in Ezeulus compound wanted to go'to the stream and draw water that morning because their new wife was going. Even little Obiageli who hated the stream because of the sharp stones on the way was very quick in bringing out her water pot. For once she cried when her mother told her to stay back and look after Amoges child. Obikas younger sister, Ojiugo, rushed up and down with the proprietary air of one who had a special claim on the bride because even the smallest child in a mans compound knew its mothers hut from the others. Ojiugos mother, Matefi, carried the same air but with studied restraint which made it all the more telling. Needless to say she wanted it to tell on her husbands younger wife and to prove to her that there was greater honour in having a daughter-in-law than in buying ivory anklets and starving your children. See that you come back quickly, she said to her daughter and her sons wife, before this spit on the floor dries up. She spat. It is only bathing that could delay us, said Nwafo. If we just draw water now and bathe another time ... I think you are mad, said his mother who had so far pretended to ignore her husbands senior wife. But let me see you come back from the stream with yesterdays body and we shall see whose madness is greater, yours or mine. The vehemence with which she said this seemed so much greater than the cause of her annoyance. In fact she was angry with her son not for what he had proposed but for his disloyalty in joining the excited flurry of the other hut. What are you still crawling about like a millipede for? Matefi asked her daughter. Will going to the stream be your days work? Oduche wore his loin-cloth of striped towelling and white singlet which he normally put on only for church or school. This made his mother even more angry than had Nwafos proposal, but she succeeded in remaining silent. Soon after the water party left Obiageli came into Ezeulus hut carrying Amoges child on her back. The child was clearly too big for her; one of his legs almost trailed the ground. 124 CHINUA ACHEBE These people are mad, said Ezeulu. Who left a sick child in your hands? Take him back to his mother at once. I can carry him, said Obiageli. Who is carrying the other? Take him to his mother, I say. She has gone to the stream, replied Obiageli bouncing up on her toes in an effort to keep the child from slipping down her back. But I can carry him. See. I know you can, said Ezeulu, but he is sick and should not be shaken about. Take him to your mother. Obiageli nodded and went into the inner compound, but Ezeulu knew she still carried the child (who had now begun to cry). Obiagelis tiny voice was striving valiantly to drown the crying and sing him to sleep: Tell the mother her child is crying Tell the mother her child is crying And then prepare a stew of uztza And also a stew of uztza Make a watery pepper-soup So the little birds who drink it Will all perish from the hiccup Mothers goat is in the barn And the yams will not be safe Fathers goat is in the barn And the yams will all be eaten Can you see that deer approaching Look! hes dipped one foot in water Snake has struck him! He withdraws! Jaja . ja kulo kulof Traveller Hawk Youre welcome home Jaja . ja kulo kulo! But wheres the length Of cloth you brought Jaja . ja kulo kulo! Nwafo! . . . Nwafo! called Ezeulu. Nwafo has gone to the stream! replied his mother from her hut. Nwafo has what? Ezeulu shouted back. Arrow of God 125 Ugoye decided to go into the obi in person and explain that Nwafo had gone on his own account. Nobody asked him to go, she said. Nobody asked him to go? retorted Ezeulu parodying a childs talk. Did you say that nobody asked him to go? Do you not know that he sweeps my hut every morning? Or do you expect me to break kolanut or receive people in an unswept hut? Did your father break his morning kolanut over yesterdays wood ash? The abomination all you people commit in this house will lie on your own heads. If Nwafo has become too strong to listen to you why did you not ask Oduche to come and sweep my hut? Oduche went with the rest. Ezeulu chose not to speak any more. His wife went away but soon returned with two brooms. She swept the hut with the palm-leaf broom and the immediate frontage of the obi with the longer and stronger bundle of okeakpa. Obika came from his hut while she swept the outside and asked: Do you sweep the iru-ezi nowadays? Where is Nwafo? No one is born with a broom in his hand, she replied testily and increased the volume of her singing. Because of the length of the broom she held and wielded it like a paddle. Ezeulu smiled to himself. When she had finished she gathered the sweepings into one heap and carried them into the plot of land on the right where she was going to plant cocoyams that season. Akuebue planned to visit Ezeulu soon after the morning meal, to rejoice with him for his sons new wife. But he had other important things to talk over with him and that was why he chose to go so early before other visitors in search of palm wine filled the place. What Akuebue wanted to talk about was not new. They had talked about it many times before. But in the past few days Akuebue had begun to hear things which worried him greatly. It was all about Ezeulus third son, Oduche, whom he had sent to learn the secrets of the white mans magic. Akuebue had doubted the sense in Ezeulus action from the very first but Ezeulu had persuaded him of its wisdom. But now it was being used by Ezeulus enemies to harm his name. People were asking: If the Chief Priest of Ulu could send his son among people who kill and eat the sacred python and commit other evils what did he expect ordinary men and women to do? The lizard who threw confusion into 126 CHINUA ACHEBE his mothers funeral rite did he expect outsiders to carry the burden of honouring his dead? And now Ezeulus first son had joined, albeit surreptitiously, his fathers opponents. He had gone to Akuebue on the previous day and asked him to go as Ezeulus best friend and speak to him without biting the words. What is wrong? A man should hold his compound together, not plant dissension among his children. Whenever Edogo felt deeply he stammered agonizingly. He did so now. I am listening. Edogo told him that the reason why Ezeulu sent Oduche to the new religion was to leave the way clear for Nwafo to become Chief Priest. Who said so? asked Akuebue. But before Edogo could answer he added: You speak about Nwafo and Oduche, what about you and Obika? Obikas mind is not on such thingsneither is mine. But Ulu does not ask if a mans mind is on something or not. If he wants you he will get you. Even the one who has gone to the new religion, if Ulu wants him he will take him. That is true, said Edogo. But what worries me is that my father makes Nwafo think he will be chosen. If tomorrow as you say Ulu chooses another person there will be strife in the family. My father will not be there then and it will all rattle around my own head. What you say is very true and I do not blame you for wanting to bale that water before it rises above the ankle. He thought about it for a while and added: But I do not think there will be strife. Nwafo and Oduche come from the same woman. It is fortunate that you and Obika have not set your minds on it. But you know what Obika is, said Edogo. He might wake up tomorrow morning and want it. The old man and his friends son talked for a long time. When Edogo finally rose to go (he had announced his intention to go three or four times before without getting up) Akuebue promised to talk to Ezeulu. He felt pity and a little contempt for the young man. Why could he not open his mouth like a man and say that he wanted to be priest instead of hiding behind Oduche and Obika? That was why Arrow of God 127 Ezeuiu never counted him among people. So he had hopes that the afa oracle would call his name when the day came? The fellow does not fall where his body might be picked up, he thought. It does not require an oracle to see that he is not the man for Chief Priest. A ripe maize can be told by merely looking at it. And yet Akuebue felt sorry for Edogo. He knew how a mans first son must feel to be pushed back so that the younger ones might come forward to receive favour. No doubt that was why in the first days of Umuaro, Ulu chose to give only one son to his Chief Priests, for seven generations. On the way to the stream that morning the bride who had not seen many white singlets in her life was inclined to take too much interest in Oduche and the new religion which provided such marvels. To curb her enthusiasm jealous Ojiugo whispered into her ear that devotees of this new cult killed and ate the python. The bride who, like any other person in Umuaro, had heard of Oduches adventure with the python asked anxiously: Did he kill it? We were told he only put it in his box. Unfortunately Ojiugo was one of the people who could never whisper, and what she said reached Oduches ears. He immediately rushed at Ojiugo and, in the words of Nwafo when he recounted the incident later, gave her thunder on the face. Whereupon Ojiugo virtually threw down her pot and attacked Oduche using the metal bangle on her wrists to give edge to her blows. Oduche replied with even more fiery slaps and a final, vicious blow with his knee on Ojiugos belly. This brought great criticism and even abuse on Oduche from many of the people who had gathered to help separate them. But Ojiugo clung to her half-brother crying: Kill me today. You must kill me. Do you hear me, Eater of python? You must kill me. She bit one of the people trying to hold her back and scratched another. Leave her alone, said one of the women in exasperation. If she wants to be killed then let her. Dont talk like that. Were you not here when he nearly killed her with a kick in the belly? Hasnt she hit him enough for it already? asked a third. No, she hasnt, said the second woman. I think he is one of those who become brave when they see a woman. 128 CHINUA ACHEBE The crowd was immediately divided between supporters of Ojiugo and those who thought she had already revenged herself sufficiently. These latter now urged Oduche to hurry away to the stream and not listen any more to Ojiugos abuse or try to answer back. The offspring of a hawk cannot fail to devour chicks, said Oyilidie, whom Ojiugo had bitten. This one resembles her mother in stubbornness. Should she have resembled your mother then? This came from Ojinika a broad-looking woman who had an old quarrel with Oyilidie. People said that in spite of Ojinikas tough appearance and the speed with which she flew into quarrels her strength was only in her mouth and a child of two could knock her down with its breath. Dont open your rotten mouth near me, do you hear? said Oyilidie. Or I shall beat okro seeds out of your mouth. Perhaps you have forgotten ... Go and eat shit, shouted Ojinika. The two were already measuring themselves against each other, standing on tiptoe and chests thrust out. What is wrong with these two? asked another woman. Give way and let me pass. Ojiugo was still sobbing when she reached home. Nwafo and Oduche had returned earlier but Ojiugos mother had disdained asking them about the others. When she saw Ojiugo coming in she wanted to ask her if they had had to wait for the stream to return from a journey or wake up from sleep. But the words dried in her mouth. What is wrong? she asked instead. Ojiugo increased her snivelling. Her mother helped her put down her water pot and asked again what was wrong. Before she said anything Ojiugo first went inside their hut, sat down on the floor and wiped her eyes. Then she told her story. Matefi examined her daughters face and saw what looked like the weal left by Oduches five fingers. She immediately raised her voice in protest and lamentation so that all the neighbourhood might hear. Ezeulu walked as unhurriedly as he could into the inner compound and asked what all the noise was about. Matefi wailed louder. Shut your mouth, Ezeulu commanded. You tell me to shut my mouth, screamed Matefi, when Oduche Arrow of God 129 takes my daughter to the stream and beats her to death. How can I shut my mouth when they bring back a corpse to me. Go and look at her face; the fellows five fingers ... Her voice had risen till it reverberated in the brain. I say shut your mouth! Are you mad? Matefi stopped her screaming. She moaned resignedly: I have shut my mouth. Why should I not shut my mouth? After all Oduche is Ugoyes son. Yes, Matefi must shut her mouth. Let nobody call my name there! shouted the other wife as she came out from her hut where she had sat as though all the noise in the compound came from a distant clan. 1 say let nobody mention my name at all. You, shut your mouth, said Ezeulu, turning to her; nobody has called your name. Did you not hear her calling my name? And if she did? . . . Go and jump on her back if you can. Ugoye grumbled and returned to her hut. Oduche! E-e-h. Come out here! Oduche came out from his mothers hut. What is all this noise about? asked Ezeulu. Ask Ojiugo and her mother. I am asking you. And dont you tell me to ask another or a dog will lick your eyes this morning. When did you people learn to fling words in my face? He looked round at them all, his manner changed to that of a crouching leopard. Let one of you open his mouth and make Jim again and I will teach him that a man does not talk when masked spirits speak. He looked round again, daring anyone to open his mouth. There was silence all round and he turned and went back to his obi, anger having smothered his interest in the cause of the affray. t Akuebues haste in plunging into the subject of Oduche proved to be ill-judged. He was anxious to finish with it before more people arrived, for there could be no doubt that quite soon the three compounds would be filled. Many of the people who came last night would come again, and many more would be coming for the first time because at this hungry season when most barns were empty of all but 130 CHINUA ACHEBE seed-yams no one would miss the chance of biting a morsel and drinking a horn in the house of a wealthy man. Akuebue knew that as soon as the first man arrived he could no longer talk with Ezeulu; so he wasted no time. Had he known how much Ezeulu had just been annoyed perhaps he would have waited for another day. Ezeulu listened silently to him, holding back with both hands the mounting irritation he felt. Have you finished? he asked when Akuebue ceased talking. Yes, I have finished. I salute you. He was not looking at his guest but vaguely at the threshold. I cannot say that I blame you; you have said nothing that a man could be blamed for saying to his friend. I am not blind and I am not deaf either. I know that Umuaro is divided and confused and I know that some people are holding secret meetings to persuade others that I am the cause of the trouble. But why should that remove sleep from my eyes? These things are not new and they will follow where the others have gone. When the rain comes it will be five years since this same man told a secret meeting in his house that if Ulu failed to fight in their blameful war they would unseat him. We are still waiting, Ulu and I, for him to come and unseat us. What annoys me is not that an overblown fool dangling empty testicles should forget himself because wealth entered his house by mistake; no, what annoys me is that the cowardly priest of Idemili should hide behind him and urge him on. It is jealousy, said Akuebue. Jealousy for what? I am not the first Ezeulu in Umuaro, he is not the first Ezidemili. If his father and his fathers father and all the others before them were not jealous of my fathers why should he be of me? No, it is not jealousy but foolishness; the kind that puts its head into the pot. But if it is jealousy, let him go on. The fly that perches on a mound of dung may strut around as it likes, it cannot move the mound. Everybody knows these two, said Akuebue. We all know that if they knew the way to Ani-Mmo they would go to quarrel with our ancestors for giving the priesthood of Ulu to Umuachala and not to their own village. I am not troubled about them. What troubles me is what the whole clan is saying. Who tells the clan what it says? What does the clan know? Somey Arrow of God 131 times, Akuebue, you make me laugh. You were hereor had you not been born thenwhen the clan chose to go to war with Okperi over a piece of land which did not belong to us. Did I not stand up then and tell Umuaro what would happen to them? And who was right in the end? What I said, did it happen or did it not? Akuebue did not answer. Every word happened as I said it would. I do not doubt that, said Akuebue and, in a sudden access of impatience and recklessness, added, but you forget one thing: that no man however great can win judgement against a clan. You may think you did in that land dispute but you are wrong. Umuaro will always say that you betrayed them before the white man. And they will say that you are betraying them again today by sending your son to join in desecrating the land. Ezeulus reply to this showed Akuebue once again that even to his best friend the priest was unknowable. Even his sons did not know him. Akuebue was not sure what reply he had expected, but it was most certainly not the laugh which he got now. It made him afraid and uneasy like one who encounters a madman laughing on a solitary path. He was given no time to examine this strange feeling of fear closely. But he was to have it again in future and it was only then he saw its meaning. Dont make me laugh, said Ezeulu again. So I betrayed Umuaro to the white man? Let me ask you one question. Who brought the white man here? Was it Ezeulu? We went to war against Okperi who are our blood brothers over a piece of land which did not belong to us and you blame the white man for stepping in. Have you not heard that when two brothers fight a stranger reaps the harvest? How many white men went in the party that destroyed Abame? Do you know? Five. He held his right hand up with the five fingers fanned out. Five. Now have you ever heard that five peopleeven if their heads reached the skycould overrun a whole clan? Impossible. With all their power and magic white men would not have overrun entire Olu and Igbo if we did not help them. Who showed them the way to Abame? They were not born there; how then did they find the way? We showed them and are still showing them. So let nobody come to me now and complain that the white man did this and did that. The 132 CHINUA ACHEBE man who brings ant-infested faggots into his hut should not grumble when lizards begin to pay him a visit. I cannot dispute any of the things you say. We did many things wrong in the past, but we should not therefore go on doing the same today. We now know what we did wrong, so we can put it right again. We know where this rain began to fall on us. . . . I am not so sure, said Ezeulu. But whether you do or not you must not forget one thing. We have shown the white man the way to our house and given him a stool to sit on. If we now want him to go away again we must either wait until he is tired of his visit or we must drive him away. Do you think you can drive him away by blaming Ezeulu? You may try, and the day I hear that you have succeeded I shall come and shake your hand. I have my own way and I shall follow it. I can see things where other men are blind. That is why I am Known and at the same time I am Unknowable. You are my friend and you know whether I am a thief or a murderer or an honest man. But you cannot know the Thing which beats the drum to which Ezeulu dances. I can see tomorrow; that is why I can tell Umuaro: come out from this because there is death there or do this because there is profit in it. If they listen to me, o-o; if they refuse to listen, o-o. I have passed the stage of dancing to receive presents. You knew my father who was priest before me. You knew my grandfather too, albeit with the eyes of a little child. Akuebue nodded in agreement. Did not my grandfather put a stop to ichi in Umuaro? He stood up in all his awe and said: We shall no longer carve our faces as if they were ozo doors. He did it, said Akuebue. What was Umuaros reply to him? They cursed him; they said their men would look like women. They said: how is a mans endurance to be tested? Today who asks such a question? Akuebue felt that he had already agreed with Ezeulu sufficiently to be able to dissent again. What you say cannot be doubted, he said, but if what we are told is true, your grandfather was not alone in that fight. There were said to be more people against ichi in Umuaro than . . . Was that how your father told you the story? I heard differently. Anyhow the important thing was that the Chief Priest led them and they followed. But if there is hearsay in that one, what about events in Arrow of God 133 my fathers time? You were not an infant when my father set aside the custom which made any child born to a widow a slave unless . . Iam not the man to dispute any of the things you say, Ezeulu. I am your friend and I can talk to you as I like; but that does not mean I forget that one half of you is man and the other half spirit. And what you say about your father and grandfather is very true. But what happened in their time and what is happening today are not the same; they do not even have resemblance. Your father and grandfather did not do what they did to please a stranger . . . This stung Ezeulu sharply but again he kept a firm hold on his anger. Do not make me laugh, he said. If someone came to you and said that Ezeulu sent his son to a strange religion so as to please another man what would you tell him? I say dont make me laugh. Shall I tell you why I sent my son? Then listen. A disease that has never been seen before cannot be cured with everyday herbs. When we want to make a charm we look for the animal whose blood can match its power; if a chicken cannot do it we look for a goat or a ram; if that is not sufficient we send for a bull. But sometimes even a bull does not suffice, then we must look for a human. Do you think it is the sound of the death-cry gurgling through blood that we want to hear? No, my friend, we do it because we have reached the very end of things and we know that neither a cock nor a goat nor even a bull will do. And our fathers have told us that it may even happen to an unfortunate generation that they are pushed beyond the end of things, and their back is broken and hung over a fire. When this happens they may sacrifice their own blood. This is what our sages meant when they said that a man who has nowhere else to put his hand for support puts it on his own knee. That was why our ancestors when they were pushed beyond the end of things by the warriors of Abam sacrificed not a stranger but one of themselves and made the great medicine which they called Ulu. Akuebue cracked his fingers and moved his head up and down. So it is a sacrifice, he muttered to himself. So Edogo was right after all, though he had seemed so foolish at the time. He paused a while then spoke aloud: What happens if this boy you are sacrificing turns out to be the one chosen by Ulu when you are looked for and not found. 134 CHINUA ACHEBE Leave that to the deity. When the time comes of which you speak Ulu will not seek your advice or help. So do not keep awake at night for that. I dont, why should I? My compound is full of its own troubles, so why should I carry yours home; where would I find space to put them? But I must repeat what I said before and if you dont want to listen you can stop your ears. When you spoke against the war with Okperi you were not alone. I too was against it and so were many others. But if you send your son to join strangers in desecrating the land you will be alone. You may go and mark it on that wall to remind you that I said so. Who is to say when the land of Umuaro has been desecrated, you or I? Ezeulus mouth was shaped with haughty indifference. As for being alone, do you not think that it should be as familiar to me now as are dead bodies to the earth? My friend, dont make me laugh. y y Nwafo who had come into his fathers hut when Akuebue was saying of Ezeulu that he was half-man, half-spirit did not understand the present dispute between the two men. But he had seen equally dangerous-looking scenes come to nothing before. He was therefore not in the least surprised when his father sent him to get palm oil sprinkled with ground pepper from his mother. When he returned with it Ezeulu had already brought down his round basket. This basket had a close-fitting lid and dangled from the roof directly above the log fire. Dangling with it were Ezeulus ceremonial raffia skirt, two calabashes and a few heads of last seasons maize specially chosen, on account of their good quality, for planting. Basket, maize and raffia skirt were all black with smoke. Ezeulu opened the round basket and brought out a boiled and smoked leg of goat and cut a big piece for Akuebue and a very small one for himself. I think I shall need something to wrap this, said Akuebue. Ezeulu sent Nwafo to cut a piece of banana leaf which he held above the smouldering log fire till it wilted slightly and lost its brittle freshness; then he passed it to Akuebue who divided the meat into two, wrapped the bigger half in the banana leaf and put it away in his bag. Then he began to eat the other half, dipping it in the peppered palm oil. Arrow of God 135 Ezeulu gave a little strand from his own piece to Nwafo and threw the remainder into his mouth. For a long time they ate in silence and when they began to talk again it was about less weighty things. Ezeulu broke off a toothpick from the broom lying on the floor near him and leaned back on the wall. From that position he easily commanded the approaches to his compound and the compound of his two sons. He was thus the first to notice the arrival of the Court Messenger and his escort. When the two strangers reached Ezeulus threshold the escort clapped his hands and said: Are the owners of this house at home? There was a slight pause before Ezeulu answered: Enter and you will see. The escort bent down at the low eaves and entered first; then the other followed. Ezeulu welcomed them and told them to sit down. The Court Messenger sat on the mud-bed but his escort remained standing. The greetings over he saluted Ezeulu and explained that he was the son of Nwodika in Umunneora. I thought I saw your fathers face as soon as you came in, said Akuebue. Very true, said Ezeulu. Anyone setting eyes on him knows he has seen Nwodika. Your friend seems to have come from far. Yes, we have come from Okperi. . . . Do you live in Okperi then? asked Ezeulu. Yes, replied Akuebue. Have you not heard of one of our young men who lives with the white man in Okperi? Ezeulu had indeed heard but deliberately feigned ignorance. True? he asked. I do not hear many things nowadays. So you have come all the way from Okperi this morning and you are here already? It is good to be strong and young. How are the people of my mothers land? You know my mother came from Okperi. There was nothing but happiness and laughter when we left; what has happened since I cannot say. And who is your companion? He is the Chief Messenger of the great white man, the Destroyer of Guns. Ezeulu cracked his fingers and nodded. So this is Wintabotas messenger? Is he a man of Okperi? No, said the escort. His clan is Umuru. 136 CHINUA ACHEBE Was Wintabota well when you let? We have not seen him in these parts for a long time. Even so. This man here is his eye. The Chief Messenger did not seem too pleased with the trend of the conversation. In his mind he was angry with this man in the bush who put on airs and pretended to be familiar with the District Officer. His escort sensed this and made desperate efforts to establish his importance. Stranger, you are welcome, said Ezeulu. What is your name? He is called Jekopu, said the escort. As I said, nobody sees the Destroyer of Guns without his consent. There is no one in Okperi who does not know the name of Jekopu. The Destroyer of Guns asked me to accompany him on this journey because he is a stranger to these parts. Yes, said Ezeulu with a meaningful glance in the direction of Akuebue. That is as it should be. The white man sends a man from Umuru and the man from Umuru is shown the way by a man of Umuaro. He laughed. What did I tell you, Akuebue? Our sages were right when they said that no matter how many spirits plotted a mans death it would come to nothing unless his personal god took a hand in the deliberation. The two men looked puzzled. Then Nwodikas son said: That is so; but we have not come on a mission of death. No. I did not say so. It is only a manner of speaking. We have a saying that a snake is never as long as the stick to which we liken its length. I know that Wintabota will not send a mission of death to Ezeulu. We are good friends. What I said was that a stranger could not come to Umuaro unless a son of the land showed him the way. That is true, said the escort. We have come ... My friend, interrupted the Chief Messenger, you have already done what you were sent to do; the rest is for me. So put your tongue into its scabbard. Forgive me. I take my hands off. Ezeulu sent Nwafo to bring kola from Matefi. By this time both Obika and Edogo had come in, news having reached them that a messenger of the white man was in their fathers hut. When the kolanut came it was shown round and broken. Arrow of God 137 Have the people you sent to the market for palm wine returned yet? asked Ezeulu. Obika said no. I knew they would not. A man who means to buy palm wine does not hang about at home until all the wine in the market is sold. He was still leaning with his back on the wall, holding one leg a little off the ground with hands interlocked on the shin. The Court Messenger removed his blue fez and planted it on his knee exposing a clean-shaven head shining with sweat. The edge of the cap left a ring around the head. He cleared his throat and spoke, almost for the first time. I salute you all. He brought out a very small book from his breast pocket and opened it in the manner of a white man. Which one of you is called Ezeulu? he asked from the book and then looked up and around the hut. No one spoke; they were all too astonished. Akuebue was the first to recover. Look round and count your teeth with your tongue, he said. Sii down, Obika, you must expect foreigners to talk through the nose. You say you are a man of Umuru? asked Ezeulu. Do you have priests and elders there? Do not take my question amiss. The white man has his own way of doing things. Before he does anything to you he will first ask you your name and the answer must come from your own lips. If you have any grain of sense in your belly, said Obika, you will know that you are not in the house of the white man but in Umuaro in the house of the Chief Priest of Ulu. Hold your tongue, Obika. You heard Akuebue say just now that strangers talk through the nose. Do you know whether they have Chief Priests in his land or the land of the white man? Tell that young man to take care how he talks to me. If he has not heard of me he should ask those who have. Go and eat shit. Shut your mouth! roared Ezeulu. This man has come all the way from my mothers land to my house and I forbid anyone to abuse him. Besides he is only a messenger. If we dislike his message our quarrel cannot be with him but with the man who sent him. Very true, said Akuebue. There are no words left, said the escort. You asked me a question, continued Ezeulu turning again to the 138 CHINUA ACHEBE messenger. I shall now answer you. I am that Ezeulu you spoke of. Are you satisfied? Thank you. We are all men here but when we open our mouths we know the men from the boys. We have spoken many words already; some were words of profit, some were not; some were words of sanity and some words of drunkenness. It is now time to say why I have come, for a toad does not run in the daytime unless something is after it. I have not come all the way from Okperi to stretch my legs. Your own kinsman here has told you how Kaputin Winta-bor-tom has put me in charge of many of his affairs. He is the chief of all the white men in these parts. I have known him for more than ten years and I have yet to see another white man who does not tremble before him. When he sent me here he did not tell me he had a friend in Umuaro. He smiled in derision. But if what you say is true we shall know tomorrow when I take you to see him. What are you talking about? asked Akuebue in alarm. The Court Messenger continued to smile menacingly. Yes, he said. Your friend Wintabota (he mouthed the name in the ignorant fashion of his hearers) has ordered you to appear before him tomorrow morning. Where? asked Edogo. Where else but in his office in Okperi. The fellow is mad, said Obika. No, my friend. If anyone is mad its you. Anyhow, Ezeulu must prepare at once. Fortunately the new road makes even a cripple hungry for a walk. We set out this morning at the first cock-crow and before we knew where we were we had got here. I said the fellow is mad. Who. . . . He is not mad, said Ezeulu. He is a messenger and he must give the message as it was given to him. Let him finish. I have finished, said the other. But I ask whoever owns this young man to advise him for his own good. You are sure you have given all the message? Yes, the white man is not like black men. He does not waste his words. I salute you, said Ezeulu, and I welcome you again: Nno! There is one small thing I forgot, said the Court Messenger. There are many people waiting to see the white man and you may Arrow of God 139 have to wait in Okperi for three or four days before your turn comes. But I know that a man like you would not want to spend many days outside his village. If you do me welj I shall arrange for you to see him tomorrow. Everything is in my hands; if I say that the white man will see this person, he will see him. Your kinsman will tell you what I eat. He smiled and put his fez back on the head. That is a small matter, said Ezeulu. It will not cause a quarrel. I do not think that what you will put into that small belly of yours will be beyond me. If it is, my kinsmen are there to help. He paused and seemed to enjoy the messengers anger at the mention of his small size. You must first return, however, and tell your white man that Ezeulu does not leave his hut. If he wants to see me he must come here. Nwodikas son who showed you the way can also show him. Do you know what you are saying, my friend? asked the messenger in utter disbelief. Are you a messenger or not? asked Ezeulu. Go home and give my message to your master. Let us not quarrel about this, said Akuebue stepping in quickly to save the situation which his spirit told him was fraught with peril. If the white mans messenger gives us some time we shall whisper together. What are you whispering for? asked Ezeulu indignantly. I have given my message. Just give us some time, said Akuebue to the messenger who complied and went outside. You may go out with him, he told the escort. Ezeulu took no part in the consultation that followed. When the Court Messenger and his companion returned to the hut it was Akuebue who told them that because of the respect he had for the white man Ezeulu had agreed to send his son, Edogo, to bring back whatever message there was for his father. In Umuaro it is not our custom to refuse a call, although we may refuse to do what the caller asks. Ezeulu does not want to refuse the white mans call and so he is sending his son. Is that your answer? asked the Court Messenger. It is, replied Akuebue. I will not take it. 140 CHINUA ACHEBE Then you can go into that bush there and eat shit, said Obika. Do you see where my finger is pointing? That bush. Nobody will eat shit, said Akuebue, and turning to the messenger he added: I have never heard of a messenger choosing the message he will carry. Go and tell the white man what Ezeulu says. Or are you the white man yourself? Ezeulu had turned a little way from the others and begun again to pick his teeth with the broomstick. 13 As soon as the messenger and his escort left Ezeulus hut to return to Okperi the Chief Priest sent word to the old man who beat the giant ikolo to summon the elders and ndichie to an urgent meeting at sunset. Soon after the ikolo began to speak to the six villages. Everywhere elders and men of title heard the signal and got ready for the meeting. Perhaps it was the threat of war. But no one spoke of war any more in these days of the white man. More likely the deity of Umuaro had revealed through divination a grievance that must be speedily removed, or else . . . But whatever it wasa call to prepare for battle or to perform a communal sacrificeit was urgent. For the ikolo was not beaten out of season except in a great emergencywhen as the saying was an animal more powerful than nte was caught by nte s trap. The meeting began as fowls went to roost and continued into the night. Had it been a day meeting children who had brought their fathers stools would have been playing on the outskirts of the market place, waiting for the end of the meeting to carry the stools home 142 CHINUA ACHEBE again. But no father took his child to a night meeting. Those who lived near the market place carried their stools themselves; the others carried goatskins rolled up under the arm. Ezeulu and Akuebue were the first to arrive. But they had hardly sat down before other elders and men of title from all the villages of Umuaro began to come into the Nkwo. At first each man as he came in saluted all those who were there before him but as the crowd increased he only greeted those nearest to him, shaking hands with only three or four. The meeting took place under the timeless ogbu tree on whose mesh of exposed roots generations of Umuaro elders had sat to take weighty decisions. Before long most of the people expected at the meeting had come and the stream of new arrivals became a mere trickle. Ezeulu held a quick consultation with those sitting nearest to him and they all agreed that the time had come to tell Umuaro why they had been called together. The Chief Priest rose to his feet, adjusted his toga and gave the salutation which was at the same time a call to Umuaro to speak with one voice. Umuaro kwenu! Hem!! Kwenu! Hem!! Kwezuenu! Hem!! I thank you all for leaving your different tasks at home to answer my call. Sometimes a man may call and no one answers him. Such a man is like one dreaming a bad dream. I thank you that you have not let me call in vain like one struggling in a bad dream. Somewhere near him someone was talking into his talk. He looked round and saw that it was Nwaka of Umunneora. Ezeulu stopped talking for a while, and then addressed the man. Ogbuefi Nwaka, I salute you, he said. Nwaka cleared his throat and stopped whatever it was he had been saying to those near him. Ezeulu continued. I was thanking you for what you have done. Our people say that if you thank a man for what he has done he will have strength to do more. But there is one great omission here for which I beg forgiveness. A man does not summon Umuaro and not set before them even a Arrow of God 143 pot of palm wine. But I was taken by surprise and as you know the unexpected beats even the man of valour . . . Then he told them the story of the Court Messengers visit to him. My kinsmen, he said in conclusion, that was what I woke up this morning and found. Ogbuefi Akuebue was there and saw it with me. I thought about it for a long time and decided that Umuaro should join with me in seeing and hearing what I have seen and heard; for when a man sees a snake all by himself he may wonder whether it is an ordinary snake or the untouchable python. So I said to myself: Tomorrow I shall summon Umuaro and tell them. Then one mind said to me: Do you know what may happen in the night or at dawn? That is why, although I have no palm wine to place before you I still thought I should call you together. If we have life there will be time enough for palm wine. Unless the penis dies young it will surely eat bearded meat. When hunting day comes we shall hunt in the backyard of the grass-cutter. I salute you all. For a long time no one stood up to reply. Instead there was general talking (which sometimes sounded like murmuring) among the assembled rulers of Umuaro. Ezeulu sat down on his stool and fixed his eye on the ground. He did not even reply when Akuebue told him that he had spoken all the words that needed to be said. At last Nwaka of Umunneora stood up. Umuaro kwenu! Hem!! Umuaro kwenu! Hem!! Kwekwanu ozo! Hem!! He put right his toga which had nearly come undone from his left shoulder. We have all heard what Ezeulu said. They were good words and I want to thank him for calling us together and speaking them to us. Do I speak the mind of Umuaro? Speak on, replied the men. When a father calls his children together he should not worry about placing palm wine before them. Rather it is they who should bring palm wine to him. Again I say thank you to the priest of Ulu. That he thought it necessary to call us and tell us these things shows 144 CHINUA ACHEBE the high regard in which he holds us, for which we give him our thanks. But there is one thing which is not clear to me in this summons. Perhaps it is clear to others; if so someone should explain it to me. Ezeulu has told us that the white ruler has asked him to go to Okperi. Now it is not clear to me whether it is wrong for a man to ask his friend to visit him. When we have a feast do we not send for our friends in other clans to come and share it with us, and do they not also ask us to their own celebrations? The white man is Ezeulus friend and has sent for him. What is so strange about that? He did not send for me. He did not send for Udeozo; he did not send for the priest of Idemili; he did not send for the priest of Eru; he did not send for the priest of Udo nor did he ask the priest of Ogwugwu to come and see him. He has asked Ezeulu. Why? Because they are friends. Or does Ezeulu think that their friendship should stop short of entering each others houses? Does he want the white man to be his friend only by word of mouth? Did not our elders tell us that as soon as we shake hands with a leper he will want an embrace? It seems to me that Ezeulu has shaken hands with a man of white body. This brought low murmurs of applause and even some laughter. Like many potent things from which people shrink in fear leprosy is nearly always called by its more polite and appeasing namewhite body. The applause and laughter was mingled with the salutation: Owner of words to Nwaka. He waited for the laughter to die down and said: If laughter presses you you can laugh; as for me it does not press me. Ezeulu sat in the same way as he had sat when he ended his speech. What I say is this, continued Nwaka, a man who brings antridden faggots into this hut should expect the visit of lizards. But if Ezeulu is now telling us that he is tired of the white mans friendship our advice to him should be: You tied the knot, you should also know how to undo it. You passed the shit that is smelling; you should carry it away. Fortunately the evil charm brought in at the end of a pole is not too difficult to take outside again. I have heard one or two voices murmuring that it is against custom for the priest of Ulu to travel far from his hut. I want to ask such people: Is this the first time Ezeulu would be going to Okperi? Who was the white mans witness that year we fought for our landand Arrow of God 145 lost? He waited for the general murmuring to die down. My words are finished. I salute you all. Others spoke. Although none spoke as harshly as Nwaka, only two came out clearly against his line of thinking. Perhaps there were others who did also, but they did not speak. Most of those who spoke said it would be foolhardy to ignore the call of the white man; had they forgotten what happened to clans which fell out with him? Nwokeke Nnabenyi tried to soften the harsh words even more. He said that six elders should be chosen to go with Ezeulu. You may go with him if your feet are hungry for a walk, shouted Nwaka. Ogbuefi Nwaka, please do not speak into my words. You stood up here and spoke to your fill and no one answered you back. He repeated his suggestion that six elders of Umuaro should go with their Chief Priest to Okperi. Ezeulu stood up then. The big fire which had been lit some distance away shone in his face. There was complete silence when he spoke. His words did not carry the rage in his chest. As always his anger was not caused by open hostility such as Nwaka showed in his speech but by the sweet words of people like Nnabenyi. They looked to him like rats gnawing away at the sole of a sleepers foot, biting and then blowing air on the wound to soothe it, and lull the victim back to sleep. He saluted Umuaro and began to speak almost with gaiety in his voice. When I called you together it was not because I am lost or because my eyes have seen my ears. All I wanted was to see the way you would take my story. I have now seen it and I am satisfied. Sometimes when we have given a piece of yam to a child we beg him to give us a little from it, not because we really want to eat it but because we want to test our child. We want to know whether he is the kind of person who will give out or whether he will clutch everything to his chest when he grows up. You yourselves know whether Ezeulu is the kind of man to run away because the white man has sent a message to him. If I had stolen his goat or killed his brother or fucked his wife then I might plunge into the bush when I heard his voice. But I have not offended him in any way. Now, as for what I shall do I had set my mind on it before I 146 CHINUA ACHEBE asked Ikolo to summon you. But if I had done anything without first speaking to you you might turn round and say: Why did he not tell us? Now I have told you and happiness fills my mind. This is not the time for many words. When the time comes to speak we shall all speak until we are tired and perhaps we shall find then that there are orators in Umuaro besides Nwaka. For the present I salute you for answering my call. Umuaro kwenu! Hem!! One of the people who followed Ezeulu home that night and offered to go with him in the morning to Okperi was his younger halfbrother, Okeke Onenyi, a famous medicine-man. But Ezeulu refused his offer as he had refused all the others, among them his friend, Akuebues. He had taken the decision to go alone and he was not going to change. As soon as he had made his offer and it was refused Okeke Onenyi rose to go although the first sporadic drops of a heavy rain had started to fall. Wont you wait and watch the face of the sky awhile? asked Edogo. No, my son, replied Okeke Onenyi and, feigning lightheartedness, added: Only those who carry evil medicine on their body should fear the rain. He walked out into the coming storm. The darkness was lit up at short, irregular intervals by lightning; sometimes it was a strong, steady light, sometimes it flickered before it went out as if the rushing wind shook its flame. Okeke Onenyis voice rose powerfully against the wind and thunder as he sang and whistled a song to keep him company in the dark. Ezeulu had said nothing to persuade him not to go in the rain. But then he rarely had anything to say to him. It was difficult to think of them as brothers. But even if they had been closer together Ezeulu might still have said nothing because his mind was not there in the hut with them. In fact all he had said for a long time was that this rain was the harbinger of a new moon. But no one took his meaning. Ezeulu and his half-brother were not enemies, but neither were they friends. Ezeulu was known to harbour an ill-will against all medicine-men most of whom he said were greedy charlatans. True medi- Arrow of God 147 cine, he said, had died with his fathers generation. Practitioners of today were mere dwarfs. Ezeulus father had indeed been a great medicine-man and magician. He performed countless marvels but the one that people talked about most was his ability to make himself invisible. There was a time when war was raging between Umuaro and Aninta and no one from the one clan dared set foot in the other. But the Chief Priest passed through Aninta as often as he wished. He always went with his son, Okeke Onenyi, who was then a little boy. He gave the boy a short broom to hold in his left hand and told him not to speak or salute any passer-by but walk close to the right edge of the path. The boy went in front and the Chief Priest followed at a distance behind, always keeping the boy in sight. Any passer-by who approached them suddenly stopped before they reached him and began to peer into the bush on the other side of the path like a hunter who had heard the rustle of game. He would be peering thus until the boy and his father passed behind him and only then would he turn again and continue on his way. Sometimes a passer-by would turn right round on their approach and go back the way he was coming. Okeke Onenyi learnt many herbs and much anwansi or magic from his father. But he never learnt this particular magic whose name was Oti-anya afu-uzo. There were few priests in the history of Umuaro in whose body priesthood met with medicine and magic as they did in the body of the last Ezeulu. When it happened the mans power was boundless. Okeke Onenyi always said that the cause of the coolness between him and the present Ezeulu, his half-brother, was the latters resentment at the splitting of the powers between them. He forgets, says Okeke Onenyi, that the knowledge of herbs and anwansi is something inscribed in the lines of a mans palm. He thinks that our father deliberately took it from him and gave to me. Has he heard me complaining that the priesthood went to him? As was to be expected this was how people who did not like Ezeulu saw his estrangement from Okeke Onenyi. They were quick to point out that it was Ezeulus pride and jealousy that made him so disdainful of his brothers renown in medicine. They pointed to the recent Covering-up Sacrifice for Obikas wife when, rather than ask his brother, 148 CHINUA ACHEBE Ezeulu had sent for a worthless medicine-man who could not even eat three meals a day from his doctoring. But there were others like Akuebue who knew Ezeulu better who retorted that there was something which Okeke Onenyi did to Ezeulu. It was not very clear what this thing was. All that was known was that it was not a thing which a brother should do to a brother; that it was unforgivable. The trouble was that Ezeulu would never unburden himself even to his friends on this matter. So his defenders had nothing but conjectures to put forward. Some said that Okeke Onenyi had tied up the womb of Ezeulus first wife after she had borne him only three children. But that cannot be, was the usual reply to this. We know all the evil medicine-men in Umuaro and Okeke Onenyi is not among them. He is not the kind of man to inflict a curse on a woman who has done him no harm, least of all his brothers wife. But you forget that Okeke Onenyi has a big grudge against Ezeulu, the others might say. You forget that in their childhood their father led Okeke to think that he was going to succeed to the priesthood and that on the old mans death Okeke all but questioned the decision of the oracle. That may be so, the other side might say. But we know all our medicine-men and we say again that Okeke Onenyi has never yet been accused by anyone of sealing up his wifes womb. Besides, medicinemen who carry on such vile practices, like men who relish human flesh, never prosper with children. But just look at Okeke Onenyis compound flowing with sons and daughters! This final argument was unanswerable especially when it was pointed out that Okeke Onenyis best friend in Ezeulus compound was Edogo, the son of the very woman he was said to have afflicted! In fact this relationship between Edogo and his uncle was known to give Ezeulu great dissatisfaction. Perhaps it was out of pique that he had said that the carving done by the one was about as good as the medicine practised by the other. Those two? he once asked, a derelict mortar and rotten palm nuts! For two or three days now Captain Winterbottom had been feeling unduly tired and run down. The rains did not seem to bring the ex- Arrow of God 149 pected respite. His gums looked paler than ever and his feet felt cold. He would not be due for another bout of fever for yet awhile; but these were the signs all right. Of course he was not afraid as a new boy might be. Fever to an old coaster was no more than an inconvenience; it laid one off for a few days that was all. Tony Clarke was suitably impressed. You should go and see a doctor, he said, knowing that this was the kind of stuff expected of new boys. Doctor? Good Lord! For a fever? No my boy. Its the first time you want to be careful. Poor Macmillan wasnt careful enough in spite of my warning. Ive had a fever every single year for ten years and when youve had it so often you stop taking any notice. No, all I need is a change of air for a week and youll see me back as sound as a bell. The trip to Enugu will do it. He was planning a visit to headquarters in two days time. For obvious reasons he wanted to tidy up the business of a warrant chief for Umuaro before he met the headquarters chaps. He could not possibly conclude the matter in two days but he wanted to be able to say that he had taken the first steps. He was a great believer in leaving the house in order as he expected to find it on his return. So he wrote copious handing over notes for Tony Clarke. He put down in black and white what he proposed to do on the subject of the paramount chief. I have today sent messengers to Umuaro to bring Ezeulu here for a preliminary discussion. Arising out of this discussion I shall fix an appropriate date in the future when the warrant of office will be given to him in the presence of the elders and ndichie of his clan. Captain Winterbottom enjoyed mystifying other Europeans with words from the Ibo language which he claimed to speak fluently. Having made these detailed arrangements for the benefit of Ezeulu Captain Winterbottom was understandably enraged when the messenger came back with the insulting reply from the self-important fetish priest. He immediately signed a warrant of arrest in his capacity as magistrate for the apprehension of the priest and gave instructions for two policemen to go to Umuaro first thing in the morning and bring the fellow in. As soon as he comes, he told Clarke, You are to lock him up in the guardroom. I do not wish to see him until after my return from 150 CHINUA ACHEBE Enugu. By that time he should have learnt good manners. I wont have my natives thinking they can treat the administration with contempt. Perhaps it was Captain Winterbottoms rage and frenzy that brought it on; perhaps his steward was right about its cause. But on that very morning when two policemen set out to arrest Ezeulu in Umuaro Captain Winterbottom suddenly collapsed and went into a delirium. The only intelligible thing he kept saying was: My feet are cold; put the hot water bottle there! His steward heated some water, put it in the rubber bottle and placed it on the mans feet. Winterbottom screamed that it was not hot enough. The steward poured in boiling water but even that was still not hot enough. He kept changing the water every few minutes and still the Captain complained. By the time Tony Clarke (who could not drive a car) found Wade to take the Captain in his old Ford to the hospital six miles away his feet had been badly scalded. But this was not discovered until the following day in the hospital. Clarke and Wade were amazed and not a little embarrassed to see Dr. Mary Savage, the severe and unfeminine missionary doctor in charge of the hospital, collapse into tears and panic as Captain Winterbottom was brought in. She kept calling, Tom, Tom, and behaving generally as though her doctoring had deserted her. But her panic lasted only a short time; she was soon mistress of herself and the situation. However, it had lasted long enough to have been noticed by a few native nurses and ward attendants who spread it not only in the hospital but in the small village of Nkisa. Both in the hospital and outside in the village Dr. Savage was known as Omesike, One Who Acts With Power, and it was not expected that she would ever cry for a patient, not even when the patient happened to be Captain Winterbottom whom they mischievously called her husband. Winterbottoms delirium lasted three days and in all that time Dr. Savage rarely left his bedside. She even postponed the operations which she performed every Wednesday for which that day was known through the village as Day of the Cutting Open of Bowels. It was always a sad day and the little daily market which had sprung up outside the gates of the hospital to supply the needs of patients from distant clans attracted fewer market women on Wednesdays than on any other day Arrow of God 151 of the week. It was also noticed that even the sky knew that day of death and mourned in gloom. Dr. Savage checked through her list of operation cases and was satisfied that there was none that could be called very urgent and decided to postpone them till Friday. Captain Winterbottoms condition had improved very slightly and there was a little hope. The next day or two would be decisive and a lot would depend on skilled nursing to help him over the critical threshold. He was in a special ward all by himself and nobody was allowed in there except Dr. Savage and her only European Sister. Captain Winterbottoms steward, John Nwodika, was told to escort the two policemen to Umuaro as he had done for the messenger. But in his mind he had sworn never again to take a representative of gorment to his home clan. His resolve was strengthened in this case when he got to know that the two policemen would be armed with a warrant of arrest and handcuffs for the Chief Priest of Ulu. But since he could not turn round and say to his master: No, I shall not go, he agreed to go but made other plans. Consequently when the two policemen came for him before the crow of the first cock they found him shivering from a sudden attack of iba. Wrapped up in an old blanket which Captain Winterbottom had given him for the child his wife delivered four months ago John managed with great effort to whisper a few directions to the men. Once they were in Umuaro, he said, any suckling child could show them Ezeulus house. This turned out to be literally true. The two men entered Umuaro at the time of the morning meal. Soon they met a man carrying a pot of palm wine and stopped him. Where is Ezeulus house? asked the leader, Corporal Matthew Nweke. The man looked suspiciously at the uniformed strangers. Ezeulu, he said after a long time in which he had seemed to search his memory. Which Ezeulu? How many Ezeulus do you know? asked the corporal irritably. How many Ezeulus do I know? repeated the man after him. I dont know any Ezeulus. Why did you ask me which Ezeulu if you dont know any? Why did I ask you Shut up! Bloody fool! shouted the policeman in English. 152 CHINUA ACHEBE I say I dont know any Ezeulu. I am a stranger here. Two other people they stopped spoke in more or less the same fashion. One of them even said that the only Ezeulu he knew was a man of Umuofia, a whole days journey in the direction of the sunrise. The two policemen were not in the least surprised. The only way to make people talk was by frightening them. But they had been warned by the European officer against using violence and threats and in particular they were not to use the handcuffs unless the fellow resisted. This was why they had shown so much restraint. But now they were convinced that unless they did something drastic they might wander around Umuaro till sunset without finding Ezeulus house. So they slapped the next man they saw when he tried to be evasive. To drive the point home they also showed him the handcuffs. This brought the desired result. He asked the men to follow him. He took them to the approaches of the compound they were looking for and pointed at it. It is not our custom, he told the policemen, to show our neighbours creditors the way to his hut. So I cannot enter with you. This was a reasonable request and the policemen released him. He ran away as fast as he could so that the inmates of the compound might not catch as much as a glimpse of his escaping back. The policemen marched into the hut and found an old woman chewing her toothless gums. She peered at them in obvious fright and did not seem to understand any of the questions they put to her. She did not even seem to remember her own name. Fortunately a little boy came in at that moment with a small piece of potsherd to take burning coals to his mother for making a fire. It was this boy who took the men around the end of the footpath to Ezeulus compound. As soon as he went out with them the old woman picked up her stick and hobbled over at an amazing speed to his mothers hut to report his behaviour. Then she returned to her hutmuch more slowly, curved behind her straight stick. Her name was Nwanyieke, a childless widow. Soon after she got back she heard the boy, Obielue, crying. Meanwhile the policemen arrived at Ezeulus hut. They were then no longer in the mood for playing. They spoke sharply, baring all their weapons at once. Which one of you is called Ezeulu? asked the corporal. Arrow of God 153 Which Ezeulu? asked Edogo. Dont ask me which Ezeulu again or I shall slap okro seeds out of your mouth. I say who is called Ezeulu here? And I say which Ezeulu? Or dont you know whom you are looking for? The four other men in the hut said nothing. Women and children thronged the door leading from the hut into the inner compound. There was fear and anxiety in the faces. All right, said the corporal in English. Jus now you go sabby which Ezeulu. Gi me dat ting. This last sentence was directed to his companion who immediately produced the handcuffs from his pocket. In the eyes of the villager handcuffs or iga were the most deadly of the white mans weapons. The sight of a fighting man reduced to impotence and helplessness with an iron lock was the final humiliation. It was a treatment given only to violent lunatics. So when the fierce-looking policeman showed his handcuffs and moved towards Edogo with them Akuebue came forward as the elder in the house and spoke reasonably. He appealed to the policemen not to be angry with Edogo. He only spoke as a young man would. As you know, the language of young men is always pull down and destroy; but an old man speaks of conciliation. He told them that Ezeulu and his son had set out for Okperi early in the morning to answer the white mans call. The policemen looked at each other. They had indeed met a man with another who looked like his son. They remembered them because they were the first people they had met going in the opposite direction but also because the man and his son looked very distinguished. What does he look like? asked the corporal. He is as tall as an iroko tree and his skin is white like the sun. In his youth he was called Nwa-anyanwu. And his son? Like him. No difference. The two policemen conferred in the white mans tongue to the great admiration of the villagers. Sometine na dat two porson we cross for road, said the corporal. Sometine na dem, said his companion. But we no go return back just like dat. All dis waka wey we waka come here no fit go for nating. The corporal thought about it. The other continued: 154 CHINUA ACHEBE Sometine na lie dem de lie. I no wan make dem put trouble for we head. The corporal still thought about it. He was convinced that the men spoke the truth but it was necessary to frighten them a little, if only to coax a sizeable kola out of them. He addressed them in Ibo: We think that you may be telling us a lie and so we must make quite sure otherwise the white man will punish us. What we shall do then is to take two of youhandcuffedto Okperi. If we find Ezeulu there we shall set you free; if not . . . He completed with a sideways movement of the head which spoke more clearly than words. Which two shall we take? The others conferred anxiously and Akuebue spoke again begging the representatives of gorment to believe their story. What would be the wisdom of deceiving messengers of the white man? he asked. Where shall we run afterwards? If you go back to Okperi and Ezeulu is not there you can come back and take not two but all of us. The corporal thought about it and agreed. But we cannot come and go for nothing. When a masked spirit visits you you have to appease its footprints with presents. The white man is the masked spirit of today. Very true, said Akuebue, the masked spirit of our day is the white man and his messengers. Ezeulus head wife was asked to prepare yam pottage with chicken for the two men. When it was ready they ate and drank palm wine. Then they rested awhile and prepared to go. Akuebue thanked them for their visit and told them that if they had met the owner of the house at home he would have given them more hospitality. Anyhow would they accept this small kola on his behalf? He placed two live cocks before them and Edogo placed beside the cocks a wooden bowl containing two shillings. The corporal thanked them but at the same time repeated his warning that if it turned out that they had been telling lies about Ezeulu, gorment would make them see their ears with their own eyes. The sudden collapse of Captain Winterbottom on the very day he sent policemen to arrest the Chief Priest of Umuaro was clearly quite significant. The first man to point the connection was John Nwodika, Second Steward to Captain Winterbottom himself. He said it was just Arrow of God 155 as he feared; the priest had hit him with a potent charm. In spite of everything then, power still resided in its accustomed place. Did I not say so? he asked the other servants after their master had been removed to hospital. Was it for nothing I refused to follow the policemen? I told them that the Chief Priest of Umuaro is not a soup you can lick in a hurry. His voice carried a note of pride. Our master thinks that because he is a white man our medicine cannot touch him. He switched over to English for the benefit of Clarkes steward who came in just then and who did not speak Ibo. I use to tellam say blackman juju no be someting wey man fit take play. But when I tellam na so so laugh im de laugh. When he finish laugh he call me John and I say Massa. He say You too talk bush talk. I tellam say O-o, one day go be one day. You no see now? The story of Ezeulus magical powers spread through Government Hill hand in hand with the story of Captain Winterbottoms mysterious collapse. When Mr. Clarke returned from hospital his steward asked how the big master was. He shook his head and said: Hes pretty bad, Im afraid. Sorry sah, said the steward, looking very worried. Dey say na dat bad juju man for yonda wey . . . Go and get my bath ready, will you? Clarke was so exhausted that he was in no mood for stewards chit-chat. So he lost the opportunity of hearing the reason for the Captains illness which was circulating not just through Government Hill but very soon throughout Okperi. It was only two days later that Wright told him about it. Other servants on Government Hill were waiting in his kitchen to hear the latest news from his steward. He went to get ready the bath and whispered to them that there was no hope, that Clarke had told him he was afraid. Later in the evening Clarke and Wade drove to the hospital again. They did not see the patient or the doctor; but Sister Warner told them there was no change. For the first time since it all started Tony Clarke felt anxious. They drove back in silence. There was a Court Messenger outside his bungalow when he got home. Deven sah, said the man. Good evening, replied Clarke. 156 CHINUA ACHEBE De witch-doctor from Umuaro don come. There was fear in his voice as though he was reporting the arrival of smallpox in the village. I beg your pardon. The man gave more details and it was only then that Clarke understood he was talking about Ezeulu. Lock him up in the guardroom till morning. Clarke made to enter the bungalow. Massa say make I putam for gaddaloom? Thats what I said, shouted Clarke. Are you deaf? No be say I deaf sah but . . . Get out! The messenger sent people to sweep the guardroom and spread a new mat in it so that it might be taken for a guest-room. Then he went to Ezeulu who had been sitting in the Courtroom with Obika since their arrival and spoke nicely to him. The big white man is sick but the other one says welcome to you, he said. He says it is dark now and he will see you in the morning. Ezeulu said nothing to him. He followed him into the dark guardroom and sat on the mat. Obika also sat down. Ezeulu brought out his snuff bottle. We shall send a lamp to you, said the messenger. Soon afterwards John Nwodika came in with his wife who had a small load on her head. She set it down and it proved to be an enormous mound of pounded cassava and a bowl of bitter-leaf soup. John Nwodika made a ball of foofoo, dipped it in the soup and swallowed to show that there was no poison in it. Ezeulu thanked him and his wife (who turned out to be the daughter of his friend in Umuagu) but refused to eat. Food is not my care now, he said. Pray, eat a littlejust one ball, said the son of Nwodika. But the old man would not be persuaded. Obika will eat for both of us. A fowl does not eat into the belly of a goat, said the other, but the old man still refused. The messenger came in again with a palm-oil lamp and Ezeulu thanked him. Arrow of God 157 Corporal Matthew Nweke who had gone to Umuaro with another policeman returned to find his wives weeping quietly and a large crowd in his one-room lodging. He was alarmed, his mind going to his little son who had measles. He rushed to the mat where he lay and touched him; he was wide awake. What is the matter? he asked then. No one spoke. The corporal who was called Couple then turned to one of the policemen in the room and put the question specifically to him. The man cleared his voice and told him that they did not expect to see him and his companion back alive, especially when the man he had gone to arrest arrived on his own. Couple wanted to explain how they had crossed each other but the man did not let him. He pressed on with a full account of all that had happened since morning and ended with the latest news from Nkisa Hospital to the effect that Captain Winterbottom would not see the dawn. At that point John Nwodika came in. But you were not well in the morning? asked Couple. That is what I have come to tell you. The illness was a warning from the Chief Priest. I am happy I listened to it; otherwise we would be telling another story now. John then told them how the Chief Priest knew all about Winterbottoms sickness before anyone told him about it. What did he say? asked one or two people together. He said: If he is ill he will also be well. I dont know what he meant, but it seemed to me that there was mockery in his voice. At first Couple Matthew Nweke was not too worried. He had a strong personal protection which a great dibia in his village made for him during his last leave. But as he heard more and more about Ezeulu his faith in his safety began to weaken. In the end he held a quick consultation with the policeman who had accompanied him to Umuaro and they decided that to be on the safe side they should go and see a local dibia straight away. It was past ten oclock at night when they arrived at the mans house. He was called throughout the village The Bow that shoots at the Sky. As soon as they came in he told them the object of their mission. You have done right to come straight to me because you indeed walked into the mouth of a leopard. But there is something bigger than a leopard. That is why I say welcome to you because you have 158 CHINUA ACHEBE reached the final refuge. He told them that they must not eat anything which they had taken from Umuaro. They must bring the two cocks and the money for sacrifice which they would carry and deposit on the highway. For what they had already eaten he gave them a preparation to drink and also to mix into their bath water. As he ate the pounded cassava and bitter-leaf soup Obika watched his father with the tail of his eye and caught a certain restlessness in him. He knew it would be useless asking him questions in his present mood. Even at the best of times Ezeulu only spoke when he wanted to and not when people asked him. He got up and made towards the narrow door, then seemed to change his mind or else to remember something he should have taken with him. He came back to his goatskin bag and searched for his snuff bottle. When he found it he made towards the door again and this time went outside saying from the doorway that he was going to urinate. He had resolved that as long as he was in Okperi he would never look for the new moon. But the eye is very greedy and will steal a look at something its owner has no wish to see. So as Ezeulu urinated outside the guardroom his eyes looked for the new moon. But the sky had an unfamiliar face. It was impossible to put ones finger anywhere on it and say that the moon would come out there. A momentary alarm 160 CHINUA ACHEBE struck Ezeulu but on thinking again he saw no cause for alarm. Why should the sky of Okperi be familiar to him? Every land had its own sky; it was as it should be. That night Ezeulu saw in a dream a big assembly of Umuaro elders, the same people he had spoken to a few days earlier. But instead of himself it was his grandfather who rose up to speak to them. They refused to listen. They shouted together: He shall not speak; we will not listen to him. The Chief Priest raised his voice and pleaded with them to listen but they refused saying that they must bale the water while it was still only ankle-deep. Why should we rely on him to tell us the season of the year? asked Nwaka. Is there anybody here who cannot see the moon in his own compound? And anyhow what is the power of Ulu today? He saved our fathers from the warriors of Abam but he cannot save us from the white man. Let us drive him away as our neighbours of Aninta drove out and burnt Ogba when he left what he was called to do and did other things, when he turned round to kill the people of Aninta instead of their enemies. Then the people seized the Chief Priest who had changed from Ezeulus grandfather to himself and began to push him from one group to another. Some spat on his face and called him the priest of a dead god. Ezeulu woke up with a start as though he had fallen from a great height. What is it? asked Obika in the darkness. Nothing. Did I say anything? You were quarrelling with someone and saying you would see who would drive the other away. I think there must be spiders on the rafters. He was now sitting up on his mat. What he had just seen was not a dream but a vision. It had all taken place not in the half-light of a dream but in the clarity of the middle day. His grandfather whom he had known with the eyes of a child had emerged again very clearly across a whole lifetime in which his image had grown weak and indistinct. Ezeulu took out his ground tobacco and put a little in each nostril to help his thinking. Now that Obika was asleep again he felt free to consider things by himself. He thought once more of his fruitless, albeit cursory, search for the door of the new moon. So even in his mothers village which he used to visit regularly as a boy and a young Arrow of God 161 man and which next to Umuaro he knew better than any villageeven here he was something of a stranger! It gave him a feeling of loss which was both painful and pleasant. He had temporarily lost his status as Chief Priest which was painful; but after eighteen years it was a relief to be without it for a while. Away from Ulu he felt like a child whose stern parent had gone on a journey. But his greatest pleasure came from the thought of his revenge which had suddenly formed in his mind as he had sat listening to Nwaka in the market place. These thoughts were a deliberate diversion. At the end of them Ezeulu had steadied himself from his dizzy nightmare. Now he looked at it again more closely and one thing stood out. His quarrel with the white man was insignificant beside the matter he must settle with his own people. For years he had been warning Umuaro not to allow a few jealous men to lead them into the bush. But they had stopped both ears with fingers. The had gone on taking one dangerous step after another and now they had gone too far. They had taken away too much for the owner not to notice. Now the fight must take place, for until a man wrestles with one of those who make a path across his homestead the others will not stop. Ezeulus muscles tingled for the fight. Let the white man detain him not for one day but one year so that his deity not seeing him in his place would ask Umuaro questions. Following Captain Winterbottoms instruction that Ezeulu should be put in his place and taught to be polite to the Administration Mr. Clarke refused to see him on the next day as the Head Messenger had promised. In fact he refused to see him for four days. On the second morning as Clarke and Wade drove again towards the hospital at Nkisa they came upon a sacrifice by the roadside. They often saw roadside sacrifices and would not normally have stopped. But this one struck them by its extraordinary lavishness. Wade pulled up and they went to see. Instead of the usual white chick there were two fully grown cocks. The other objects were normal; young, yellowish palm fronds cut from the summit of the tree, a clay bowl with two lobes of kolanut inside it and a piece of white chalk. But the two white men only saw these objects later. What caught their eye immediately on reaching the sacrifice was the English florin. Well I never! said Wade. 162 CHINUA ACHEBE Now this is very strange, a most extravagant sacrifice. I wonder what its all about. Perhaps its for the recovery of the Kings Representative, said Wade lightly. Then something seemed to strike him and he spoke seriously. I dont like the look of it. I dont mind if they use their cowries and manillas but the head of George the Fifth! Clarke chuckled but stopped immediately as Wade put his left hand into the bowl and picked out the piece of silver, cleaned it first with leaves and then on his woolen hose and put it into his pocket. Good heavens! What do you think you are doing? I wont have the King of England dragged into a disgusting juju, replied Wade, laughing. This incident worried Clarke a great deal. He had convinced himself that he admired people like Wade and Wright who seemed to do an important job without taking themselves too seriously, who were always looking for the lighter side of things. But was this lack of feelingfor it certainly showed a monstrous lack of feeling to desecrate someone elses sacrificepart of the temperament of looking for the lighter side of life? If so would one not finally come down in favour of the seriousness (and its accompanying pomposity) of the Winterbottoms? Without making any conscious decision Clarke was preparing himself to assume the burden of the Administration in the event of Winterbottoms death. It would fall on him to defend his natives if need be from the thoughtless acts of white people like Wade. That same morning Ezeulu sent Obika back to Umuaro to tell his family how things stood, and to arrange for his younger wife to come and cook his meals. But their clansman, John Nwodika, would not hear of it. It is not necessary, he said. My wife is the daughter of your old friend and she will not allow you to send home for another woman. I know that we cannot give you the kind of food you would eat at home. But if we have two palm kernels to chew we shall give one to you and a cup of water to swallow it with. Ezeulu could not refuse the offer when it was put that way. Whatever he might have against Nwodikas son he could not offend the daughter of his friend, Egonwanne, who died three years come next Arrow of God 163 harvest. So he told Obika not to send Ugoye but to arrange for large quantities of yams and other foods to be brought. Ezeulu had good reasons for disliking the son of Nwodika. He came from the very village in Umuaro which was always poking its finger into Ezeulus eye; his job was said to comprise licking plates in the white mans kitchen in Okperi which was a great degradation for a son of Umuaro. Worst of all he had brought the white mans insolent messenger to Ezeulus house. But by the end of his first day in Okperi Ezeulu was beginning to soften towards the man, and to see that even a hostile clansman was a friend in a strange country. For the Okperi of Government Hill was indeed a strange country to Ezeulu. It was not the Okperi he had known as a boy and young man, the village of his mother, Nwanyieke. There must still be parts of that old Okperi left, but Ezeulu could not possibly go out in search of it at this time of his disgrace. Where would he find the eye with which to look at the old sites and old faces? It was fortunate that he felt that way for it saved him the mortification of being told he was a prisoner and could not come and go as he liked. As he ate his meal that night he heard the voices of children welcoming the new moon. Onwa atu-o-o-o! Onwa atu-o-o-o! went up on all sides of Government Hill. But Ezeulus sharp ear picked out a few voices that sang in a curious dialect. Except for the word moon he could not make out what they said. No doubt they were the children of some of these people who spoke a curious kind of Igbothrough the nose. The first time Ezeulu heard the childrens voices his heart flew out. Although he had expected it, when it did come he was not ready. His mind had momentarily forgotten. But he recovered almost at once. Yes, his deity must now be asking: Where is he? and soon Umuaro will have to explain. There was great anxiety in Ezeulus compound throughout the first and second days of his absence. Although it was the heart of the planting season nobody went to work. Obikas bride, Okuata, left her lonely hut and moved into her mother-in-laws. Edogo left his own compound and sat in his fathers obi waiting for news. Neighbours and even passers-by came in and asked: Have they returned yet? After a while the question began to make Edogo angry especially when it came from those whose main interest was gossip. 164 CHINUA ACHEBE By the middle of the second day, however, Obika returned. At first no one dared ask any questions; some of the women appeared on the brink of tears. Even at such a serious and anxious moment Obika could not resist the temptation to alarm them further. He had worn a face like a muddied pond as he came up the approaches to the hut; now he slumped down on the floor as though he had run all the way from Okperi. He called for cold water which his sister brought him. When he had drunk and set the calabash down Edogo put the first question to him. Where is the person with whom you went? he asked, skirting the dreaded finality of a name. Not even Obika could dare to joke after that. He allowed a short pause and said: He was well when I left him. The tightening fear in the faces broke. Why did the white man send for him? Where did you leave him? When is he coming home? Which one shall I answer? Obika tried to recover the earlier tension again but it was too late. I havent got seven mouths. When I left him this morning the white man had not told us anything. We did not even see him because they said he was at the mouth of death. This piece of news caused a little stir. From the stories told of the white man it had not occurred to them that he could be sick like ordinary people. Yes, he is already half dead. But he has a younger brother to whom he had given the message to give to Ezeulu. But this one was so troubled by his brothers sickness that he forgot to see us. So Ezeulu said to me: Prepare and go home or they will think we have come to harm. That is why I returned. Who gives him food? asked Ugoye. You remember the son of Nwodika who brought the white mans first messenger here, Obika replied, though not to Ugoye but the men. It turned out that his wife is the daughter of Ezeulus old friend in Umuagu. She has been cooking for us since yesterday and she says that as long as she is alive Ezeulu will not send home for another woman. Did I hear you well? asked Akuebue, who had so far said very little. Did you say that the wife of a man in Umunneora is giving food to Ezeulu? Arrow of God 165 Please do not tell me such a story again. Edogo, get ready now, we are going to Okperi. Ezeulu is not a small child, said Anosi, their neighbour. He cannot be taught those with whom he may eat. Do you hear what I say, Edogo? Get ready now; I am going home to get my things. I do not want to stop you from going, said Obika, but do not talk as if you alone have sense. Ezeulu and I did not simply open our mouths while our eyes were shut. Last night Ezeulu refused food even though Nwodikas son tasted it for us. But by this morning Ezeulu had seen enough of the mans mind to know that he had no ill-will. Akuebue was not impressed by anything the others said. He knew enough about the men of Umunneora. As for those who said that Ezeulu was not a child they could not know the bitterness in his mind. Akuebue knew the man better than his children or his wives. He knew that it was not beyond him to die abroad so as to plague his enemies at home. It was possible that the hands of Nwodikas son were clean, but one must make quite sure even at the risk of offending him. Who would swallow phlegm for fear of offending others? How much less swallow poison? Ezeulus neighbour, Anosi, whose opinion had gone unheeded earlier on in the discussion and who had kept quiet since then surfaced again with an opposite view. I think that Akuebue is right in what he says. Let him go with Edogo to satisfy himself that all is well. But let Ugoye also go with them, taking yams and other things; in that way the visit will not offend anyone. But what is this fear of causing offence? asked Akuebue impatiently. I am not a small boy; I know how to cut without drawing blood. But I shall not be afraid to offend a man of Umunneora if Ezeulus life hangs on it. True, agreed Anosi. Very true. My father used to say that it is the fear of causing offence that makes men swallow poison. You enter the house of a bad man and he brings out a kolanut. You do not like the way he has brought it out and your mind tells you not to eat it. But you are afraid to offend your host and you swallow ukwalanta. I agree with Akuebue. 166 CHINUA ACHEBE Perhaps no one felt Ezeulus absence as keenly as Nwafo. And now his mother was going too. But this second blow was greatly softened by the thought that Edogo was going as well. Ezeulus absence had given Edogo an opportunity to show his resentment against the old mans favourite. As the first son Edogo had taken temporary possession of his fathers hut to await his return. Nwafo who rarely left the hut now began to feel his half-brothers hostility pushing him out. Although he was only a little boy he had the mind of an adult; he could tell when someone looked at him with a good eye or with a bad. Even if Edogo had said nothing Nwafo would still have known that he was not wanted. But Edogo had told him yesterday to go to his mothers hut and not sit around the obi gazing into the eyes of people older than himself. Nwafo went out and cried; for the first time in his life he had been told that he was not welcome in his fathers hut. Throughout today he had kept away until Obikas return when everyone in the compound and even neighbours had come in to hear the news. He took his accustomed position defiantly; but Edogo said nothing to himhe did not even appear to have noticed him. Nwafos sister Obiageli cried for a long time after their mother and the others left for Okperi. Oduches promise to pick her icheku and udala did not console her. In the end Obika threatened to go and call out the fearsome masked spirit called Ichele. This produced an immediate result. Obiageli sat in one corner of the obi sniffing quietly. As night drew near Nwafos mind returned to the thought which had been troubling him since yesterday. What would happen to the new moon? He knew his father had been expecting it before he went away. Would it follow him to Okperi or would it wait for his return? If it appeared in Okperi with what metal gong would Ezeulu receive it? Nwafo looked at the ogene which lay by the wall, the stick with which it was beaten showing at its mouth. The best solution was for the new moon to wait for his return tomorrow. However as dusk came down Nwafo took his position where his father always sat. He did not wait very long before he saw the young thin moon. It looked very thin and reluctant. Nwafo reached for the ogene and made to beat it but fear stopped his hand. Arrow of God 167 Ezeulu was still hearing in his mind the voices of the children of Government Hill when Nwodikas son and his wife brought him his supper. As usual Nwodikas son took a ball of foofoo, dipped it in the soup and swallowed. Ezeulu ate with a good appetite. Although he would not eat egusi soup out of choice this one was so well prepared that one hardly knew it was egusi. The fish in it was either asa or something equally good, and it had been smoked half dry which was the beauty of that type of fish. The foofoo had a very good texture, neither too light nor too heavy; no doubt the cassava had been lightened with green bananas. He was half-way through his meal when his son, his wife and his friend arrived. They were shown in by the Head Messenger whose duty it was to look after prisoners detained in the guardroom. At first Ezeulu feared that something bad had happened at home. But when he saw the yams they brought his mind returned again. Why did you not wait till morning? We did not know whether you would be setting out for home in the morning, said Akuebue. Home? Ezeulu laughed. It was the laughter of those who do not cry. Who talks of home? I have not seen the white man who sent for me. They say he is in the mouth of death. Perhaps he wants a Chief Priest to be sacrificed at his funeral. The earth of Umuaro forbid! said Akuebue, and the others joined in. Are we at Umuaro now? asked Ezeulu. If the man is sick and he has not left a message for you then you should go home and come again when he is well, said Edogo, who did not think that this was the place for his father and his friend to engage in their battle of words, This is not a journey I want to do twice. No, I shall sit here until I have seen the head and the tail of this matter. Do you know how long he will be sick? You may be here . . . If he is sick till palm fruits ripen at the tip of the frond I shall wait . . . How are the people at home, Ugoye? They were well when we left them. Her neck looked shorter from carrying the load. The children, Obikas wife and all the others? Everybody was well. 168 CHINUA ACHEBE And what about the people of your household? he asked Akuebue. They were quiet when I left them. There was no sickness only hunger. That is a small matter, said Nwodikas son. Hunger is better than sickness. As he said this he went outside and blew his nose. He came back rubbing the nose with the back of his hand. Nwego, you need not wait to collect the utensils. I shall bring them home. Go and find something for these people to eat. His wife took Ugoyes head-load and the two women went to prepare another meal. There was no time to waste and as soon as the women left Akuebue spoke. Obika has told us how Nwodikas son and his wife have been taking care of you. You have seen with your eyes. Ezeulus mouth was full of fish. Thank you, said Akuebue to John Nwodika. Thank you, said Edogo. We have done nothing that calls for thanks. What can a poor man and his wife do? We know that Ezeulu has meat and fish in his own house but while he is here we will share the palm kernel we eat with him. A woman cannot place more than the length of her leg on her husband. When Obika told us about it I said to myself that there was nothing like travelling. True, said Ezeulu. The young he-goat said that but for his sojourn in his mothers clan he would not have learnt to stick up his upper lip. He laughed to himself. I should have travelled more often in my mothers country. It has certainly taken away your heavy face of yesterday, said Akuebue. When they told me that a man of Umunneora was looking after you I told them it was a lie. How could it be seeing the war we wage at home? That is for the people at home, said Nwodikas son. I do not carry it with me when I travel. Our wise men have said that a traveller to distant places should make no enemies. I stand by it. Very true, said Akuebue, wondering how best to lead on to the object of his coming. After a short pause he decided to split it open Arrow of God 169 with one blow of the matchet as the people of Nsugbe were said to split their coconut. Our journey has two aims. We brought Ugoye to relieve Nwodikas wife of her burden and to thank Nwodika himself and tell him that whatever his kinsmen may be doing at home he is today a brother to Ezeulu and his family. As he said this Akuebue was already searching arm-deep in his goatskin bag for his little razor and kolanut. The tying of the blood-knot between Edogo and John Nwodika was over in the short silence that followed. Ezeulu and Akuebue watched in silence as the two young men ate a lobe of kolanut smeared with each others blood. How did you come to work for the white man? asked Akuebue when they resumed ordinary talking. Nwodikas son cleared his throat. How did I come to work for the white man? I should say that my chi planned that it should be so. I did not know anything about the white man at the time; I had not learnt his language or his custom. It will be three years next dry season. My age mates and I came from Umunneora to Okperi to learn a new dance as we had done for many years in the dry season after the harvest. To my great astonishment I found that my friend called Ekemezie in whose house I always lodged during these visits and who came and lodged with me whenever our village played host to his village, I found that he was no longer among the dancers of Okperi. I searched in vain for him among the crowd that came out to welcome us. Another friend called Ofodile took me to his house instead and it was from him I heard that Ekemezie had gone to work for the white man. I do not know how I felt when I heard that news. It was almost as if I had been told that my friend had died. I tried to find out more from Ofodile about this white mans work but Ofodile is not the kind of person who can sit down and tell a story to the end. But the next day Ekemezie came to see me and brought me to this Gorment Heel. He called me by name and I answered. He said everything was good in its season; dancing in the season of dancing. But, he said, a man of sense does not go on hunting little bush rodents when his age mates are after big game. He told me to leave dancing and join in the race for the white mans money. I was all eyes. Ekemezie called me Nwabueze and I said yes it was my name. He said the race for the white mans money would not wait till tomorrow or till we were ready to join; if the rat could not run fast enough it must make way for the tortoise. He said other people from every small clan 170 CHINUA ACHEBE some people we used to despisethey were all now in high favour when our own people did not even know that day had broken. The three men listened in silence. In his mind Akuebue was flicking his fingers and saying: I now understand why Ezeulu has taken such a sudden liking for him. Their thoughts are brothers. But Ezeulu was actually hearing Nwodikas opinion of the white man for the first time and glowing with justification. Only he concealed his satisfaction, for once he had taken a stand on any matter he did not want to appear eager for others support; it was not his concern but theirs. So my brothers, continued Nwodikas son, that was how your brother came to work for the white man. At first he put me to weed his compound, but after one year he called me and said that my handiwork was good and took me to work inside his house. He asked me my name and I told him my name was Nwabueze; but he could not call it so he said he would call me Johnu. This brought a smile to his face, but it was short-lived. I know that some people at home have been spreading the story that I cook for the white man. Your brother does not see even the smoke from his fire; I just put things in order in his house. You know the white man is not like us; if he puts his plate here he will be angry if you have it there. So I go round every day and see that everything is in its right place. But I can tell you that I do not aim to die a servant. My eye is on starting a small trade in tobacco as soon as I have collected a little money. People from other places are gathering much wealth in this trade and in the trade for cloth. People from Elumelu, Aninta, Umuofia, Mbaino, they control the great new market. They decide what goes on in it. Is there one Umuaro man among the wealthy people here? Not one. Sometimes I feel shame when others ask me where I come from. We have no share in the market; we have no share in the white mans office; we have no share anywhere. That was why I rejoiced when the white man called me the other day and told me that there was a wise man in my village and that his name was Ezeulu. I told him yes. He asked if he was still alive and I said yes. He said: Go with the Head Messenger and tell him that I have a few questions I want to ask him about the custom of his people because I know he is a wise man. I said to myself: This is our chance to bring our clan in front of the white man. I did not know that it would turn out like this. He bent his head forward and looked at the ground in sorrow. It is not your fault, said Akuebue. Things are always like that. Arrow of God 171 Our eye sees something; we take a stone and aim at it. But the stone rarely succeeds like the eye in hitting the mark. 1 blame myself, said Nwodikas son sadly. You are a suspicious one, said Ezeulu. The others had gone to pass the night at the place of Nwodikas son leaving Akuebue and Ezeulu in the small guardroom. I stand for a man dying when his chi says so. But this man is not a poisoner although he comes from Umunneora. I dont know, said Akuebue, shaking his head. Every lizard lies on its belly, so we cannot tell which has a bellyache. No. But I tell you Nwodikas son has a straight mind towards me. I can smell a poisoner as clearly as I can a leper. Akuebue still shook his head. Ezeulu could just make out the movement in the weak light of the palm-oil lamp. Did you not watch him when you brought up the question of the blood-tie? Ezeulu continued. If he had had an evil thought you would have seen it in the middle of his forehead. No, the man is not dangerous. Rather he acts like a man of olden times, when people liked themselves. Today there are too many wise people; and it is not good wisdom they have but the kind that blackens the nose. How does a man get any sleep with all these mosquitoes? asked Akuebue, waving his fly-whisk wildly around. You have not seen them yet; wait till we have blown this lamp out. I was meaning to ask Nwodikas son to get me a bunch of arigbe leaves to try and smoke them out. But your coming took everything off my mind. Last night they almost carved us up. He too waved his horse-tail. Did you say your people were all well? he asked, trying to shift the conversation from himself. They were all quiet, replied Akuebue, yawning with head thrown backwards. What was Udenkwos story? You know you did not have the chance to tell me all of it. That is so, said Akuebue with revived interest. If I told you I was happy with Udenkwo I would be deceiving myself. She is my daughter but I can tell you she takes entirely after her mother. I have told her many times that a woman who carries her head on a rigid neck 172 CHINUA ACHEBE as if she is carrying a pot of water will never live for long with any husband. I have not heard my in-laws story but from what Udenkwo told me I can say that the cause of the quarrel was very small. My inlaw was told to bring a cock for sacrifice. When he got home he pointed at one cock and told the children to catch it and tie it up for him. It turned out to be Udenkwos cock and she started a quarrel. This is what she told me. I asked her did she want her husband to go to the market for a cock when his wives kept fowls. She said: Why should it always be my cock; what about the other wife, or did the spirits say they only ate Udenkwos chicken? I said to her: How many times has he taken your cock and how is a man to know which cock belongs to whom? She did not answer. All that she knew was that whenever my in-law wanted a cock for a sacrifice he remembered her. That was all? That was all. Ezeulu smiled. One would think our in-law made a sacrifice every market. Exactly what I told her. But as I said Udenkwo is like her mother. Her real anger was that my in-law did not put his forehead on the ground to beg her. Ezeulu did not speak immediately. He seemed to be reconsidering the matter. Every man has his own way of ruling his household, he said at last. What I do myself if I need something like that is to call one of my wives and say to her: I need such and such a thing for a sacrifice, go and get it for me. I know I can take it but I ask her to go and bring it herself. I never forget what my father told his friend when I was a boy. He said: In our custom a man is not expected to go down on his knees and knock his forehead on the ground to his wife to ask her forgiveness or beg a favour. But, a wise man knows that between him and his wife there may arise the need for him to say to her in secret: I beg you. When such a thing happens nobody else must know it, and that woman if she has any sense will never boast about it or even open her mouth and speak of it. If she does it the earth on which the man brought himself low will destroy her entirely. That was what my father told his friend who held that a man was never wrong in his own house. I have never forgotten those words of my fathers. My wifes cock belongs to me because the owner of a person is also owner of Arrow of God 173 whatever that person has. But there are more ways than one of killing a dog. That is true, Akuebue admitted. But such words should be kept for the ears of my in-law. As for my daughter I do not want her to go on thinking that whenever her husband says yah! to her she must tie her little baby on her back, take the older one by the hand and return to me. My mother did not behave like that. Udenkwo learnt it from her mother, my wife, and she is going to pass it on to her children, for when mother-cow is cropping giant grass her calves watch her mouth. It was on his fourth day in Okperi that Ezeulu received a sudden summons to see Mr. Clarke. He followed the messenger who brought the order to the corridor of the white mans office. There were many other people there, some of them sitting on a long bench and the rest on the cement floor. The messenger left Ezeulu in the corridor and went into an adjoining room where many people worked at various tables for the white man. Ezeulu saw the messenger through a window as he talked to a man who seemed to be the leader of all these workers. The messenger pointed in his direction and the other man followed with his eye and saw Ezeulu. But he only nodded and continued to write in his big book. When he finished what he was writing he opened a connecting door and disappeared into another room. He did not stay long there; when he came out again he beckoned at Ezeulu, and showed him into the white mans presence. He too was writing, but with his left hand. The first thought that came to Ezeulu on seeing him was to wonder whether any black man could ever achieve the same mastery over book as to write it with the left hand. Your name is Ezeulu? asked the interpreter after the white man had spoken. This repeated insult was nearly too much for Ezeulu but he managed to keep calm. Did you not hear me? The white man wants to know if your name is Ezeulu. Tell the white man to go and ask his father and his mother their names. There followed an exchange between the white man and his interpreter. The white man frowned his face and then smiled and explained something to the interpreter who then told Ezeulu that there was no insult in the question. It is the way the white man does his own 174 CHINUA ACHEBE things. The white man watched Ezeulu with something like amusement on his face. When the interpreter finished he tightened up his face and began again. He rebuked Ezeulu for showing disrespect for the order of the government and warned him that if he showed such disrespect again he would be very severely punished. Tell him, said Ezeulu, that I am still waiting to hear his message. But this was not interpreted. The white man waved his hand angrily and raised his voice. Ezeulu did not need to be told that the white man said he did not want to be interrupted again. After that he calmed down and spoke about the benefits of the British Administration. Clarke had not wanted to deliver this lecture which he would have called complacent if somebody else had spoken it. But he could not help himself. Confronted with the proud inattention of this fetish priest whom they were about to do a great favour by elevating him above his fellows and who, instead of gratitude, returned scorn, Clarke did not know what else to say. The more he spoke the more he became angry. In the end thanks to his considerable self-discipline and the breathing space afforded by talking through an interpreter Clarke was able to rally and rescue himself. Then he made the proposal to Ezeulu. The expression on the priests face did not change when the news was broken to him. He remained silent. Clarke knew it would take a little time for the proposal to strike him with its full weight. Well, are you accepting the offer or not? Clarke glowed with the I-know-this-will-knock-you-over feeling of a benefactor. Tell the white man that Ezeulu will not be anybodys chief, except Ulu. What! shouted Clarke. Is the fellow mad? I tink so sah, said the interpreter. In that case he goes back to prison. Clarke was now really angry. What cheek! A witch-doctor making a fool of the British Administration in public! 15 Ezeulus reputation at Government Hill had suffered a sharp decline when the first day passed and the second and the third and still no news came that Captain Winterbottom had died. Now it rose again in a different way with his refusal to be a white mans chief. Such an action had no parallel anywhere in Igboland. It might be thought foolish for a man to spit out a morsel which fortune had placed in his mouth but in certain circumstances such a man compelled respect. Ezeulu himself was full of satisfaction at the way things had gone. He had settled his little score with the white man and could forget him for the moment. But it was not easy to forget and as he went over the events of the past few days he almost persuaded himself that the white man, Wintabota, had meant well but that his good intentions had been frustrated in action by all the intermediaries like the Head Messenger and this ill-mannered, young white pup. After all, he reminded himself, it was Wintabota who a few years ago proclaimed him a man of truth from all the witnesses of Okperi and Umuaro. It was he also who 176 CHINUA ACHEBE later advised him to send one of his sons to learn the wisdom of his race. All this would suggest that the white man had goodwill towards Ezeulu. But what was the value of the goodwill which brought him to this shame and indignity? The wife who had seen the emptiness of life had cried: Let my husband hate me as long as he provides yams for me every afternoon. In any case, Ezeulu said to himself, Wintabota must answer for the actions of his messengers. A man might pick his way with the utmost care through a crowded market but find that the hem of his cloth had upset and broken anothers wares; in such a case the man, not his cloth, was held to repair the damage. But in spite of all this Ezeulus dominant feeling was that more or less he was now even with the white man. He had not yet said the last word to him, but for the moment his real struggle was with his own people and the white man was, without knowing it, his ally. The longer he was kept in Okperi the greater his grievance and his resources for the fight. At first few people in Umuaro believed the story that Ezeulu had rejected the white mans offer to be a Warrant Chief. How could he refuse the very thing he had been planning and scheming for all these years, his enemies asked? But Akuebue and others undertook to spread the story to every quarter of Umuaro and very soon it was known also in all the neighbouring villages. Nwaka of Umunneora treated the story with contempt. When he could no longer disbelieve it he explained it away. The man is as proud as a lunatic, he said. This proves what I have always told people, that he inherited his mothers madness. Like every other thing Nwaka said from malice this one had its foundation in truth. Ezeulus mother, Nwanyieke, had indeed suffered from severe but spasmodic attacks of madness. It was said that had her husband not been such a powerful man with herbs she might have raved continuously. But despite Nwaka and other implacable enemies of Ezeulu the number of people who were beginning to think that he had been used very badly grew every day in Umuaro. More and more people began to visit him at Okperi; on one day alone he received nine visitors, some of whom brought him yams and other presents. Arrow of God 177 Two weeks after he was first admitted into the Nkisa Mission Hospital Captain Winterbottom had recovered sufficiently for Tony Clarke to be allowed to see himfor five minutes. Dr. Savage stood at the door with a pocket watch. He was incredibly white, almost a smiling corpse. Hows life with you? he asked. Clarke could hardly wait to answer. He rushed in with the story of Ezeulus refusal to be chief as though he wanted to extract an answer before Winterbottoms mouth was closed for ever. Leave him inside until he learns to co-operate with the Administration. I did say you were not to talk, said Dr. Savage, coming quickly between them wearing a false smile. Captain Winterbottom had shut his eyes and was already looking worse. Tony Clarke felt guilty and left immediately but with a big weight taken off his mind. On his way back to Government Hill he thought with admiration of the facility with which Captain Winterbottom even in sickness could hit on the right word. Refusing to co-operate with the Administration. After Ezeulus refusal to be chief Clarke had made one more attempt through the Chief Clerk to persuade him to change his mind, and had failed. The situation thus became quite intolerable. Should he keep the man in prison or set him loose? If he let him go the reputation of the Administration would sag to the ground especially in Umuaro where things were only now beginning to look up after a long period of hostility to the Administration and Christianity. According to what Clarke had read Umuaro had put up more resistence to change than any other clan in the whole province. Their first school was only a year or so old and a tottering Christian mission had been set up after a series of failures. What would be the effect on such a district of the triumphant return of a witch-doctor who had defied the Administration? But Clarke was not the person to lock a man up without fully satisfying his own conscience that justice had not only been done but appeared to have been done. Now that he had been given the answer his earlier scruples sounded a little silly; but they had been very real. What had worried him was this: if he kept the fellow in jail what would he say was his offence? What would he put down in the log? For making an ass of the Administration? For refusing to be a chief? This apparently small point vexed Clarke like a fly at siesta. He realized it 178 CHINUA ACHEBE was insignificant but that did not help matters; if anything it made them worse. He could not just clap an old man (yes, a very old man) into jail without reasonable explanation. All very silly really, he thought, now that Winterbottom had given him the answer. The moral of all this was that if older coasters like Winterbottom were no wiser than younger ones they at least had finesse, and this was not to be dismissed lightly. Captain Winterbottom had a setback in his recovery and for another fortnight no one was allowed to see him. Among the servants and African staff on Government Hill the rumour spread first the he was insane and then that he was paralysed. Ezeulus reputation continued to rise with these rumours. Now that the cause of his imprisonment was generally known it was impossible not to have sympathy for him. He had done no harm to the white man and could justifiably hold up his ofo against him. In that position whatever Ezeulu did in retaliation was not only justified, it was bound by its merit to have potency. John Nwodika explained that Ezeulu was like a puff-adder which never struck until it had first unlocked its seven deadly fangs one after the other. If while it did this its tormentor did not have the good sense to run for its life it would have only itself to blame. Ezeulu had given enough warning to the white man during the four markets he had been locked in prison. So he could not be blamed if he now hit back by destroying his enemys sense or killing one side of his body leaving the other side to squirm in half life, which was worse than total death. Ezeulu had now been held for thirty-two days. The white man had sent emissaries to beg him to change his mind but had not had the face to see him again in personat least so the story went in Okperi. Then one morning, on the eighth Eke market since his arrest he was suddenly told he was free to go home. To the amazement of the Head Messenger and the Chief Clerk who brought him the message he broke into his rare belly-deep laugh. So the white man is tired? The two men smiled their agreement. I thought he had more fight than that inside him. The white man is like that, said the Chief Clerk. I prefer to deal with a man who throws up a stone and puts his head to receive it not one who shouts for a fight but when it comes he trembles and passes premature shit. Arrow of God 179 The two men seemed by the look on their faces to agree with this too. Do you know what my enemies at home call me? Ezeulu asked. At this point John Nwodika came in to express his joy at what had happened. Ask him; he will tell you. They call me the friend of the white man. They say Ezeulu brought the white man to Umuaro. Is that not so, Son of Nwodika? It is true, said the other, looking a little confused from being asked to confirm the end of a story whose beginning he had not heard. Ezeulu killed a fly that had perched on his shin. It fell down on the floor and he looked at the palm with which he killed it: then he rubbed the palm on the mat to remove the stain and examined it again. They say I betrayed them to the white man. He was still looking at his palm. Then he seemed to ask himself: Why am I telling these things to strangers? and stopped. You should not give too much thought to that, said John Nwodika. How many of those who deride you at home can wrestle with the white man as you have done and press his back to the ground? Ezeulu laughed. You call this wrestling? No, my clansman. We have not wrestled; we have merely studied each others hand. I shall come again, but before that I want to wrestle with my own people whose hand I know and who know my hand. I am going home to challenge all those who have been poking their fingers into my face to come outside their gate and meet me in combat and whoever throws the other will strip him of his anklet. The challenge of Eneke Ntulukpa to man, bird and beast, said John Nwodika with childlike excitement. You know it? said Ezeulu happily. John Nwodika broke into the taunting song with which the bird, Eneke, once challenged the whole world. The two strangers laughed; it was just like Nwodika. Whoever puts the other down, said Ezeulu when the song was ended, will strip him of his anklet. Ezeulu s sudden release was the first major decision Clarke had taken on his own. It was exactly one week since his visit to Nkisa to obtain a satisfactory definition of the mans offence and in that time he 180 CHINUA ACHEBE had already developed considerable self-confidence. In letters he had written home to his father and his fiancee after the incident he had made fun of his earlier amateurishnessa certain sign of present selfassurance. No doubt his new confidence had been helped by the letter from the Resident authorizing him to take day to day decisions and to open confidential correspondence not addressed personally to Winterbottom. The mail runner brought in two letters. One looked formidable with red wax and sealthe type junior Political Officers referred to lightly as Top Secret: Burn Before Before You Open. He examined it carefully and saw it was not personal to Winterbottom. He felt like a man who had just been initiated into an important secret society. He put the packet aside for the moment to read the smaller one first. It turned out to be no more than the weekly Reuters telegram sent as an ordinary letter from the nearest telegraphic office fifty miles away. It carried the news that Russian peasants in revolt against the new regime had refused to grow crops. Serve them right, he said, and put it aside; he would take it at the close of day to the notice board in the Regimental Mess. He sat up and took the other packet. It was a report by the Secretary for Native Affairs on Indirect Rule in Eastern Nigeria. The accompanying note from the Lieutenant Governor said that the report had been discussed fully at the recent meeting of Senior Political Officers at Enugu which Captain Winterbottom had unfortunately been too ill to attend. It went on to say that in spite of the very adverse report attached he had not been given any directive for a change of policy. That was a matter for the Governor. But as a decision might be taken one way or another soon it was clearly inadvisable to extend the appointment of Warrant Chiefs to new areas. It was significant that the Warrant Chief for Okperi was singled out in the report for criticism. The letter concluded by asking Winterbottom to handle the matter with tact so that the Administration did not confuse the minds of the natives or create the impression of indecision or lack of direction as such an impression would do untold harm. When days later Clarke was able to tell Winterbottom about the Report and the Lieutenant Governors letter he showed an amazing lack of interest, no doubt the result of the fever. He only muttered under his breath something like: Shit on the Lieutenant Governor! 16 Although it was now the heart of the wet season Ezeulu and his companion had set out for home in dry, hopeful, morning weather. His companion was John Nwodika who would not hear of his plan to do the long journey alone. Ezeulu begged him not to trouble himself but it was all in vain. It is not a journey which a man of your station can take alone, he said. If you are bent on returning today I must come with you. Otherwise stay till tomorrow when Obika is due to visit. I cannot stay another day, said Ezeulu. I am the tortoise who was trapped in a pit of excrement for two whole markets; but when helpers came to haul him out on the eighth day he cried! Quick, quick: I cannot stand the stench. So they set out. Ezeulu wore his shimmering, yellow loincloth underneath arid a thick, coarse, white toga over it; this outer cloth was passed under the right armpit and its two ends thrown across the left shoulder. Over the same shoulder he carried his long-strapped goat- 182 CHINUA ACHEBE skin bag. On his right hand he held his aloa long, iron, walking-staff with a sharp, spear-like lower end which every titled man carried on important occasions. On his head was a red ozo cap girdled with a leather band from which an eagle feather pointed slightly backwards. John Nwodika wore a thick brown shirt over khaki trousers. The weather held until they were about half-way between Okperi and Umuaro. Then the rain seemed to say: Now is the time; there are no houses on the way where they can seek shelter. It took both hands off its support and fell down with immense, smothering abandon. John Nwodika said: Let us shelter under a tree for a while to see if it will diminish. It is dangerous to stand under a tree in a storm like this. Let us go on. We are not salt and we are not carrying evil medicine on our body. At least I am not. So they pressed on, the cloth clinging as if terrified to their bodies. Ezeulus goatskin bag was full of water and he knew his snuff was already ruined. The red cap too never liked water and would be the worse for it. But Ezeulu was not depressed; if anything he felt a certain elation which torrential rain sometimes gavethe heady feeling which sent children naked into the rain singing: Mill zobe ezobe! Ka mgbaba ogwogwo! But Ezeulus elation had an edge of bitterness to it. This rain was part of the suffering to which he had been exposed and for thick he must exact the fullest redress. The more he suffered now the greater would be the joy of revenge. His mind sought out new grievances to pile upon all the others. He crooked the first finger of his left hand and drew it across his brow and over his eyes to clear the water that blinded him. The broad, new road was like an agitated, red swamp. Ezeulus staff no longer hit the earth with a hard thud; its pointed end sank in with a swish up to the length of a finger before it met hard soil. Occasionally the rain subsided suddenly as if to listen. Only then was it possible to see separately the giant trees and the undergrowth with limp, dripping leaves. But such lulls were very short-lived; they were immediately overrun by new waves of thick rain. Arrow of God 183 Rain was good on the body only if it lasted so long and stopped clean. If it went on longer the body began to run cold. This rain did not know the boundary. It went on and on until Ezeulus fingers held on to his staff like iron claws. This is what you have earned for your trouble, he said to John Nwodika. His voice was thick and he cleared his throat. It is you I am worried about. Me? Why should anyone worry about an old man whose eyes have spent all their sleep? No, my son. The journey in front of me is very small beside what I have put behind. Where-ever the flame goes out now I shall put the torch away. Another gust of rain came and smothered John Nwodikas reply. Ezeulus people were greatly worried when he came in numb and shivering. They made a big fire for him while his wife, Ugoye, quickly prepared camwood ointment. But first of all he needed some water to wash his feet which were covered with red mud right up to his ozo anklet. Then he took the camwood paste from the coconut shell and rubbed his chest while Edogo rubbed his back. Matefi whose turn it was to cook for Ezeulu that night (they had kept count even in his absence) had already started preparing utazi soup. Ezeulu drank it hot and his body began gradually to return to him. The rain was already spent when Ezeulu got home and soon stopped altogether. The first thing he did after he had drunk his utazi soup was to send Nwafo to tell Akuebue of his return. Akuebue was grinding his snuff when Nwafo brought him the news. He did not wait to finish his grinding. He transferred the halfground snuff into a small bottle using a special thin knife-blade. Then he swept the finer particles to the middle of the grinding-stone with a feather and transferred them also to the bottle. He used the feather again on the big and the small stones until all the powder had gone into the bottle. He put the two stones away and called one of his wives to tell her where he was going. If Osenigwe comes to borrow the stones, he said as he threw his cloth over his shoulder, tell him I have not finished. There were already a handful of people in Ezeulu s hut when Akuebue arrived. All the neighbours were there and every passer-by who heard of his return interrupted his errand to greet him. Ezeulu 184 CHINUA ACHEBE said very litde, accepting most of the greeting with his eye and a nod. The time had not come to speak or to act. He must first suffer to the limit because the man to fear in action is the one who first submits to suffer to the limit. That was the terror of the puff-adder; it would suffer every provocation, it would even let its enemy step on its trunk; it must wait and unlock its seven fangs one after the other. Then it would say to its tormentor: Here I am! All efforts to draw Ezeulu into the conversation failed or achieved only limited success. When his visitors spoke about his refusal to be white mans chief he only smiled. It was not that he disliked the people around him or the subject about which they spoke. He enjoyed it all and even wished that Nwodikas son had stayed on to tell them about all the things that had happened; but he had only stopped for a short while and then gone on to his own village to pass the night before returning to Okperi in the morning. He had even refused to wash the mud off his feet. Iam going out in the rain again, he had said. Washing my feet now would be like cleaning the anus before passing excrement. As if he knew what Ezeulu was thinking about at that moment one of his visitors said: The white man has met his match in you. But there is one side to this story which I do not understandthe role played by the son of Nwodika in Umunneora. When the matter has cooled down he must answer one or two questions. I stand with you, said Anosi. Nwodikas son has already explained, said Akuebue, who had been acting as Ezeulus mouth. What he did was done in the belief that he was helping Ezeulu. The other man laughed. He did? What an innocent man! I suppose he puts his bowl of foofoo into his nostrils. Tell me another story! Never trust a man of Umunneora. That is what I say. This was Ezeulus neighbour, Anosi. If a man of Umunneora tells me to stop I will run, and if he tells me to run, I shall stand where I am. This one is different, said Akuebue. Travelling has changed him. Hi-hi-hi-hi, laughed Ifeme. He will only add foreign tricks to the ones his mother taught him. You are talking like a small boy, Akuebue. Arrow of God 185 Do you know why it has rained all afternoon today? asked Anosi. It is because Udendus daughter is going on uri. So the rainmakers of Umunneora chose to spoil their kinsmans feast. They not only hate others, they hate themselves more. Their badness wears a hat. True. It is pregnant and nursing a baby at the same time. Very true. They are my mothers people but all I do is peep fearfully at them. Ifeme rose to go. He was a short, stoutly-built man who always spoke at the top of his voice as though every conversation was a quarrel. I must go, Ezeulu, he shouted so loud that those in the womens huts heard him. We thank the great god and we thank Ulu that no bad story has accompanied your travel. Perhaps you were saying to yourself there: Ifeme has not come to visit me, I wonder whether there is a quarrel between us. There is no quarrel between Ezeulu and Ifeme. I was thinking all the time that I must visit Ezeulu; my eyes reached you but my feet lagged behind. I kept saying: Tomorrow I shall go, but every day gave me a different order. As I said before: Nno.  It was the same with me, said Anosi. I kept saying: Tomorrow I shall go, tomorrow I shall go, like the toad which lost the chance of growing a tail because of I am coming, I am coming.  Ezeulu moved his back from against the wall where it had rested and appeared to be giving all his attention to his grandson, Amechi, who was trying in vain to open the old mans clenched fist. But his mind was still on the conversation around him, and he spoke a word or two when he had to. He looked up momentarily and thanked Ifeme for his visit. Amechis restlessness increased and soon turned to crying even though Ezeulu had allowed him to open his fist. Nwafo, come and take him to his mother. I think sleep is coming. Nwafo came, bent down on both knees and presented his back to Amechi. But instead of climbing on he stopped crying, clenched his little fist and landed a blow in the middle of Nwafos back. This caused general laughter, and he looked round the company with streaks of recent tears under his eyes. 186 CHINUA ACHEBE All right, you go away, Nwafo; he doesnt like youyou are not a good person. He wants Obiageli. And truly Amechi climbed on to Obiagelis back without any trouble. You see, said two or three voices together. Obiageli raised herself to her feet with difficulty, bent slightly and made a sudden jerk with the waist. This threw the child further up her back and she walked away. Softly,said Ezeulu. Dont worry yourself, said Anosi. She knows what to do. Obiageli went out in the direction of Edogos compound singing: Tell the mother her child is crying Tell the mother her child is crying And then prepare a stew of uziza And also a stew of uzha Make a watery pepper-soup So the little birds who drink it Will all perish from the hiccup Mothers goat is in the barn And the yams will not be safe Fathers goat is in the barn And the yams will all be eaten Can you see that deer approaching Look! hes dipped one foot in water Snake has struck him! He withdraws! Jaja . ja kulo kulo! Traveller Hawk Youre welcome home Jaja . ja kulo kulo! But wheres the length Of cloth you brought Jaja . ja kulo kulo! As long as he was in exile it was easy for Ezeulu to think of Umuaro as one hostile entity. But back in his hut he could no longer see the matter as simply as that. All these people who had left what they were doing or where they were going to say welcome to him could not be called enemies. Some of themlike Anosimight be people of little consequence, ineffectual, perhaps fond of gossip and sometimes given Arrow of God 187 to malice; but they were different from the enemy he had seen in his dream at Okperi. In the course of the second day he counted fifty-seven visitors excluding the women. Six of them had brought palm wine; his son-inlaw, Ibe, and his people had brought two big pots of excellent wine and a cock. Throughout that day Ezeulus hut had the appearance of a festival. Two or three people had even come from Umunneora, the enemy village. Again, at the end of the day, Ezeulu continued his division of Umuaro into ordinary people who had nothing but goodwill for him and those others whose ambition sought to destroy the central unity of the six villages. From the moment he made this division thoughts of reconciliation began, albeit timidly, to visit him. He knew he could say with justice that if one finger brought oil it messed up the others; but was it right that he should stretch his hand against all these people who had shown so much concern for him during his exile and since his return? The conflict in his mind was finally resolved for him on the third day from a very unexpected quarter. His last visitor that day had been Ogbuefi Ofoka, one of the worthiest men in Umuaro but not a frequent visitor to Ezeulus house. Ofoka was well known for speaking his mind. He was not one of those who would praise a man because he had offered him palm wine. Rather than let palm wine blind him Ofoka would throw it away, put his horn back in his goatskin bag and speak his mind. I have come to say Nno to you and to thank Ulu and thank Chukwu for seeing that you did not stub your foot against a rock, he said. I want to tell you that all Umuaro heaved a sigh of relief the day you set foot in your hut once again. Nobody sent me to deliver this message to you but I think you should know it. Why do I say so? Because I know the frame of mind in which you went away. He paused and then stretched his neck out towards Ezeulu in some kind of defiance. I am one of those who stood behind Nwaka of Umunneora when he said that you should go and speak to the white man. Ezeulus face did not show any change. Do you hear me well? continued Ofoka. I am one of those who said that we shall not come between you and the white man. If you like you may ask me never to set foot in your house again when I have spoken. I want you to know if you do not already know it that the 188 CHINUA ACHEBE elders of Umuaro did not take sides with Nwaka against you. We all know him and the man behind him; we are not deceived. Why then did we agree with him? It was because we were confused. Do you hear me? The elders of Umuaro are confused. You can say that Ofoka told you so. We are confused. We are like the puppy in the proverb which attempted to answer two calls at once and broke its jaw. First you, Ezeulu, told us five years ago that it was foolish to defy the white man. We did not listen to you. We went out against him and he took our gun from us and broke it across his knee. So we know you were right. But just as we were beginning to learn our lesson you turn round and tell us to go and challenge the same white man. What did you expect us to do? He paused for Ezeulu to answer but he did not. If my enemy speaks the truth I will not say because it is spoken by my enemy I will not listen. What Nwaka said was the truth. He said: Go and talk to the white man because he knows you. Was that not the truth? He spoke in malice but he spoke truth. Who else among us could have gone out and wrestled with him as you have done? Once again, Nno. If you do not like what I have said you may send me a message not to come to your house again. I am going. This summed up all the argument that had been going on in Ezeulus mind for the past three days. Perhaps if Akuebue had spoken the same words they might not have had equal power. But coming from a man who was neither a friend nor an enemy they caught Ezeulu unprepared and struck home. Yes, it was right that the Chief Priest should go ahead and confront danger before it reached his people. That was the responsibility of his priesthood. It had been like that from the first day when the six harassed villages got together and said to Ezeulus ancestor: You will carry this deity for us. At first he was afraid. What power had he in his body to carry such potent danger? But his people sang their support behind him and the flute man turned his head. So he went down on both knees and they put the deity on his head. He rose up and was transformed into a spirit. His people kept up their song behind him and he stepped forward on his first and decisive journey, compelling even the four days in the sky to give way to him. The thought became too intense for Ezeulu and he put it aside to cool. He called his son, Oduche. What are you doing? Arrow of God 189 lam weaving a basket. Sit down. Oduche sat on the mud-bed and faced his father. After a short pause Ezeulu spoke direct and to the point. He reminded Oduche of the importance of knowing what the white man knew. I have sent you to be my eyes there. Do not listen to what people saypeople who do not know their right from their left. No man speaks a lie to his son; I have told you that before. If anyone asks you why you should be sent to learn these new things tell him that a man must dance the dance prevalent in his time. He scratched his head and continued in a relaxed voice. When I was in Okperi I saw a young white man who was able to write his book with the left hand. From his actions I could see that he had very little sense. But he had power; he could shout in my face; he could do what he liked. Why? Because he could write with his left hand. That is why I have called you. I want you to learn and master this mans knowledge so much that if you are suddenly woken up from sleep and asked what it is you will reply. You must learn it until you can write it with your left hand. That is all I want to tell you. As the excitement over Ezeulus return died down life in his compound gradually went back to its accustomed ways. The children in particular rejoiced at the end of the half-mourning under which they had lived for more than a whole moon. Tell us a story, said Obiageli to her mother, Ugoye. Actually it was Nwafo who had put her up to it. Tell you a story with these unwashed utensils scattered around? Nwafo and Obiageli immediately went to work. They moved away the little mortar for grinding pepper and turned it over and put the smaller vessels on the bamboo ledge. Ugoye herself changed the nearly-burnt-out taper on the tripod with a new one from the palm-oilsoaked bunch in a potsherd. Ezeulu had eaten every morsel of the supper Ugoye prepared for him. This should have made any woman very happy. But in a big compound there was always something to spoil ones happiness. For Ugoye it was her husbands senior wife, Matefi. No matter what Ugoye did Matefis jealousy never let her rest. If she cooked a modest meal in her own hut Matefi said she was starving her children so that she could buy ivory bracelets; if she killed a cock as she did this evening Matefi said she was seeking favour from her husband. Of course 190 CHINUA ACHEBE she never said any of these things to Ugoyes face, but all her gossip eventually got back to Ugoye. This evening as Oduche was dressing the chicken in an open fire Matefi had gone up and down clearing her throat. After the room had been tidied up Nwafo and Obiageli spread a mat and sat by their mothers low stool. Which story do you want to hear? Onwuero, said Obiageli. No, said Nwafo, we have heard it too often. Tell us about All right, cut in Obiageli. Tell us about Eneke Ntulukpa. Ugoye searched her memory for a while and found what she looked for. Once upon a time there was a man who had two wives. The senior wife had many children but the younger one had only one son. But the senior wife was wicked and envious. One day the man and his family went to work on their farm. This farm was at the boundary between the land of men and the land of spirits . . . Ugoye, Nwafo and Obiageli sat in a close group near the cooking place. Oduche sat apart near the entrance to the one sleeping-room holding his new book, Azu Ndu, to the yellow light of the taper. His lips moved silently as he spelt out and formed the first words of the reader: aba aba ego ego i r o iro azu azu o m u omu Meanwhile Ezeulu had pursued again his thoughts on the coming struggle and began to probe with the sensitiveness of a snails horns the possibility of reconciliation or, if that was too much, of narrowing down the area of conflict. Behind his thinking was of course the knowledge that the fight would not begin until the time of harvest, after three moons more. So there was plenty of time. Perhaps it was this knowledge that there was no hurry which gave him confidence to play with alternativesto dissolve his resolution and at the right time form it again. Why should a man be in a hurry to lick his fingers; was he Arrow of God 191 going to put them away in the rafter? Or perhaps the thoughts of reconciliation were from a true source. But whatever it was, Ezeulu was not to be allowed to remain in two minds much longer. Ta! Nwanu! barked Ulu in his ear, as a spirit would in the ear of an impertinent human child. Who told you that this was your own fight? Ezeulu trembled and said nothing, his gaze lowered to the floor. I say who told you that this was your own fight to arrange the way it suits you? You want to save your friends who brought you palm wine he-he-he-he-he! Only the insane could sometimes approach the menace and mockery in the laughter of deitiesa dry, skeletal laugh. Beware you do not come between me and my victim or you may receive blows not meant for you! Do you not know what happens when two elephants fight? Go home and sleep and leave me to settle my quarrel with Idemili, whose envy seeks to destroy me that his python may again come to power. Now you tell me how it concerns you. I say go home and sleep. As for me and Idemili we shall fight to the finish; and whoever throws the other down will strip him of his anklet! After that there was no more to be said. Who was Ezeulu to tell his deity how to fight the jealous cult of the sacred python? It was a fight of the gods. He was no more than an arrow in the bow of his god. This thought intoxicated Ezeulu like palm wine. New thoughts tumbled over themselves and past events took on new, exciting significance. Why had Oduche imprisoned a python in his box? It had been blamed on the white mans religion; but was that the true cause? What if the boy was also an arrow in the hand of Ulu? And what about the white mans religion and even the white man himself? This was close on profanity but Ezeulu was now in a mood to follow things through. Yes, what about the white man himself? After all he had once taken sides with Ezeulu and, in a way, had taken sides with him again lately by exiling him, thus giving him a weapon with which to fight his enemies. If Ulu had spotted the white man as an ally from the very beginning, it would explain many things. It would explain Ezeulus decision to send Oduche to learn the ways of the white man. It was true Ezeulu had given other explanations for his decision but those were the 192 CHINUA ACHEBE thoughts that had come into his head at the time. One half of him was man and the other half mmothe half that was painted over with white chalk at important religious moments. And half of the things he ever did were done by this spirit side. 17 The people of Umuaro had a saying that the noise even of the loudest events must begin to die down by the second market week. It was so with Ezeulus exile and return. For a while people talked about nothing else; but gradually it became just another story in the life of the six villages, or so they imagined. Even in Ezeulus compound the daily rounds established themselves again. Obikas new wife had become pregnant; Ugoye and Matefi carried on like any two jealous wives; Edogo went back to his carving which he had put aside at the height of the planting season; Oduche made more progress in his new faith and in his reading and writing; Obika, after a short break, returned to palm wine in full force. His temporary restraint had been largely due to the knowledge that too much palm wine was harmful to a man going in to his wifeit made him pant on top of her like a lizard fallen from an iroko tree and reduced him in her esteem. But now that Okuata had become pregnant he no longer went in to her. 194 CHINUA ACHEBE Even Ezeulu himself seemed to have put away all his grievance. No hint of it came into his daily offering of kolanut and palm wine to his fathers or into the simple ritual he performed at every new moon. It was also time for his younger wife to be pregnant again having rested for over a year since the death of her last child. So she began to answer his call to sleep some nights in his hut. This did not improve her relations with Matefi who was past child-bearing. The minor feasts and festivals of the year took place in their proper season. Some of them were observed by all six villages together and some belonged to individual ones. Umuagu celebrated their Mgba Agbogho or the Wrestling of the Maidens; Umunneora observed their annual feast in honour of Idemili, Owner of the python. Together the six villages held the quiet retreat called Oso Nwanadi to placate the resentful spirits of kinsmen killed in war or in other ways made to suffer death in the cause of Umuaro. The heavy rains stopped as usual for a spell of dry weather without which yams could not produce big tubers despite luxuriant leaves. In short, life went on as though nothing had happened or was ever going to happen. There was one minor feast which Ezeulus village, Umuachala, celebrated towards the end of the wet season and before the big festival of the yearthe New Yam feast. This minor celebration was called Akwu Nro. It had little ritual and was no more than a memorial offering by widows to their departed husbands. Every widow in Umuachala prepared foofoo and palm nut soup on the night of Akwu Nro and put it outside her hut. In the morning the bowls were empty because her husband had come up from Ani-Mmo and eaten the food. This years Akwu Nro was to have an added interest because Obikas age group would present a new ancestral Mask to the village. The coming of a new Mask was always an important occasion especially when as now it was a Mask of high rank. In the last few days there had been a lot of coming and going among members of the Otakagu age group. Those of them who had leading roles to play at the ceremony would naturally be targets of malevolence and envy and must therefore be hard-boiled in protective magic. But even the others had to have some defensive preparation rubbed into shallow cuts on the arm. All the arrangements were made secretly in keeping with the mystery of ancestral spirits. In recent years new thinking had gone into the Arrow of God 195 need for strengthening the defences around this mystery in Umuaro. It had become clear to the elders that although no woman dared speak openly when she saw a Mask it was not too difficult for her to guess the man behind it. All that was necessary was to look at all the people around the Mask and see who was absent. To overcome this difficulty the elders had recently ruled that whenever a group or a village wished to bring out a Mask they must go outside their group or village for their man. So the Otakagu age group in Umuachala had gone all the way to Umuogwugwu to select the man to wear the mask. The man they chose was called Amumegbu; he was in Umuachala during all the preparations but his presence was kept very secret. Both Edogo and Obika were intimately concerned with the Mask that was to come. It belonged to Obikas age group, but more than that he had been selected as one of the two people to slaughter rams in its presence. Edogo came into it because he had carved the mask. It was a little past midday. Obika sat on the floor of his hut, his feet astride the stone on which he sharpened his matchet. Trickles of sweat ran down his face and he held his lower lip with the upper teeth as he worked. He had already used a whole head of salt to give greater edge to the stone; and now and again he squeezed a little lime juice onto the blade. Two emptied fruits lay near the stone with three or four uncut ones. Obika had been working on his new matchet at intervals during the past three days and it was now sharp enough to shave the hair. He rose and went outside to see it well in the light. He held it up before him and by twisting his wrist made it flash like a mirror in the sun. He seemed satisfied, went back into his hut and put it away. Then he passed through to the inner compound and saw his wife turning water from the big pot outside the hut into a bowl. She stood up wearily and spat as she always did nowadays. Old woman, Obika teased her. I have said if you know what you did to me you should come and undo it, she said, smiling. Not very long after that the first sounds of the coming event were heard in the village. Half a dozen young men ran up and down the different quarters beating their ogene and searching for the Mask; for no one knew which of the million ant holes in Umuachala it would come through. They kept up their search for a very long time and the sound of their metal gong and of their feet when they were near kept the 196 CHINUA ACHEBE whole village on edge. As soon as the suns heat began to soften the village emptied itself onto the ilo. The ilo of Umuachala was among the biggest in Umuaro and the best kept. It was sometimes called Ilo Agbasioso because its length cowed even the best runners. At one of its four corners stood the okwolo house from where those initiated into the mystery of ancestral spirits watched the display on the ilo. The okwolo was a tall, unusual hut having only two side and back walls. Looking at it from the open front one saw tiers of steps running the whole breadth of the hut and rising from the ground almost to the roof. The elders of the village sat on the lowest rungs which had the best view and the others sat on the back and higher rungs. Behind the okwolo stood a big udala tree which like all udala trees in Umuaro was sacred to ancestral spirits. Even now many children were playing under it waiting for the occasional fall of a ripe, light-brown fruitthe prize for the fastest runner or the luckiest child nearest whom it fell. The tree was full of the tempting fruit but no one young or old was allowed to pick from the tree. If anyone broke this rule he would be visited by all the Masked spirits in Umuaro and he would have to wipe off their footsteps with heavy fines and sacrifice. Although Ezeulu and Akuebue were early there were already immense crowds on the ilo when they arrived. Everybody in Umuachala seemed to be either there or on his way, and many people came from all the other villages of Umuaro. Women and girls, young men and boys had already formed a big ring on the ilo; as more and more people poured in from every quarter the ring became thicker and the noise greater. There were no young men with whips trying to keep the crowd clear of the centre; this would take care of itself as soon as the Mask arrived. A big stir and commotion developed in one part of the crowd and spread right round. People asked those nearest them what it was and they pointed at something. Thousands of fingers were soon pointed in the same direction. There, in a fairly quiet corner of the ilo, sat Otakekpeli. This man was known throughout Umuaro as a wicked medicine-man. More than twice he had had to take kolanut from the palm of a dead man to swear he had no hand in the death. Of course he had survived each oath which could mean he was innocent. But people Arrow of God 197 did not believe it; they said he had immediately rushed home and drunk powerful, counteracting potions. From what was known of him and by the way he sat away from other people it was clear he had not come merely to watch a new Mask. An occasion such as this was often used by wicked men to try out the potency of their magic or to match their power against that of others. There were stories of Masks which had come out unprepared and been transfixed to a spot for days or even felled to the ground. Perhaps the most suspicious thing about Otakekpeli was his posture. He sat like a lame man with legs folded under him. They said it was the fighting posture of a boar when a leopard was about: it dug a shallow hole in the earth, sat with its testicles hidden away in it and waited with standing bristles on its head of iron. As a rule, the leopard would go its way, in search of goats and sheep. The crowd watched Otakekpeli with disapproval; but no one challenged him because it was dangerous to do so but even more because most people in their hearts looked forward to the spectacle of two potent forces grappling with each other. If the Otakagu age group chose to bring out a new Mask without first boiling themselves hard it was their own fault. In fact most of these encounters produced no visible results at all because the powers were equally matched or the target was stronger than the assailant. The approach of the Mask caused a massive stampede. The women and children scattered and fled in the opposite direction, screaming with the enjoyment of danger. Soon they were all back again because the Mask had not even come into sight; only the ogene and singing of its followers had been heard. The metal gong and voices became louder and louder and the crowd looked around them to be sure that the line of flight was clear. There was another stampede when the first harbingers of the Mask burst into the ilo from the narrow footpath by which it was expected to arrive. These young men wore raffia and their matchets caught the light as they threw them up or clashed them in salute of each other from left to right and then back from right to left. They ran here and there, and sometimes one would charge at full speed in one direction. The crowd at that point would scatter and the man would brake all of a sudden and tremble on all toes. The gong and the voices were now quite near but they were almost 198 CHINUA ACHEBE lost in the uproar of the crowd. It was likely that the Mask had stopped for a while or it would have appeared by now. Its attendants kept up their song. The first spectacle of the day came with the arrival of Obika and a flute man at his heels singing of his exploits. The crowd cheered, especially the women because Obika was the handsomest young man in Umuachala and perhaps in all Umuaro. They called him Ugo nachomma. No sooner was Obika in the ilo than he caught sight of Otakekpeli sitting on his haunches. Without second thoughts he made straight for him at full speed then stopped dead. He shouted at the medicine-man to get up at once and go home. The other merely smiled. The crowd forgot all about the Mask. Okuata had taken a position away from the thickest press because of her pregnancy. Her heart had swollen when the crowd greeted her husband; now she shut her eyes and the ground reeled round her. Obika was now pointing at Otakekpeli and then pointing at his own chest. He was telling the man that if he wanted to do something useful with his life he should get up. The other man continued to laugh at him. Obika renewed his progress but not with the former speed. He prowled like a leopard, his matchet in his right hand and a leather band of amulets on his left arm. Ezeulu was biting his lips. It would be Obika, he thought, the rash, foolish Obika. Did not all the other young men see Otakekpeli and look away? But his son could never look away. Obika Ezeulu stopped in mid-thought. With the flash of lightning Obika had dropped his matchet, rushed forward and in one movement lifted Otakekpeli off the ground and thrown him into the near-by bush with a shower of sand. The crowd burst out in one great high-vaulting cheer as Otakekpeli struggled powerlessly to his feet pointing an impotent finger at Obika who had already turned his back on him. Okuata opened her eyes again and heaved a sigh. The Mask arrived appropriately on the crest of the excitement. The crowd scattered in real or half-real terror. It approached a few steps at a time, each one accompanied by the sound of bells and rattles on its waist and ankles. Its body was covered in bright new cloths mostly red and yellow. The face held power and terror; each exposed tooth was the size of a big mans thumb, the eyes were large sockets as big as a Arrow of God 199 fist, two gnarled horns pointed upwards and inwards above its head nearly touching at the tip. It carried a shield of skin in the left hand and a huge matchet in the right. Ko-ko-ko-ko-ko-ko-oh! it sang like cracked metal and its attendants replied with a deep monotone like a groan: Hum-hum-hum.   Ko-ko-ko-ko-ko-ko-oh. Oh-oyoyo-oyoyo-oyoyo-oh: oh-oyoyo-oh. Hum-hum. There was not much of a song in it. But then an Agaba was not a Mask of song and dance. It stood for the power and aggressiveness of youth. It continued its progress and its song, such as it was. As it got near the centre of the ilo it changed into the song called Onye ebuna uzo cho ayi okwu. It was an appeal to all and sundry not to be the first to provoke the ancestral Mask; and it gave minute details of what would befall anyone who ignored this advice. He would become an outcast, with no fingers and no toes, living all by himself in a solitary hut, a beggars satchel hanging down his shoulder; in other words, a leper. Whenever it tried to move too fast or too dangerously two sweating attendants gave a violent tugging at the strong rope round its waist. This was a very necessary, if somewhat hazardous, task. On one occasion the Mask became so enraged by this restraint that it turned on the two men with raised matchet. They instantly dropped the rope and fled for their lives. This time the cry of the scattering crowd carried real terror. But the two men did not leave the Mask free too long. As soon as it gave up chasing them they returned once more to their task. A very small incident happened now which would not have been remembered at all had it not been followed by something more serious. One of the young men had thrown up his matchet and failed to catch it in the air. The crowd always on the look-out for such failures sent up a big boo. The man, Obikwelu, picked up his matchet again and tried to cover up by a show of excessive agility; but this only brought more laughter. Meanwhile the Mask had proceeded to the okwolo to salute some of the elders. Ezeulu de-de-de-de-dei, it said. Our father, my hand is on the ground, replied the Chief Priest. Ezeulu, do you know me? How can a man know you who are beyond human knowledge? 200 CHINUA ACHEBE Ezeulu, our Mask salutes you, it sang. Eje-ya-mma-mma-mma-mma-mma-mma-eje-ya-mma! sang its followers. Ora-obodo, Agabe salutes you! E je-ya-mma-mma-mma-mma-mma-mma-eje-ya-mma! Have you heard the song of the Spider? Eje-ya-mma-mma-mma-mma-mma-mma-eje-ya-mma! It broke off suddenly, turned round and ran straight ahead. The crowd in that direction broke up and scattered. Although Edogo could have taken one of the back seats in the okwolo he chose to stand with the crowd so as to see the Mask from different positions. When he had finished carving the face and head he had been a little disappointed. There was something about the nose which did not please hima certain fineness which belonged not to an Agaba but to a Maiden Spirit. But the owners of the work had not complained; in fact they had praised it very highly. Edogo knew, however, that he must see the Mask in action to know whether it was good or bad. So he stood with the crowd. Looking at it now that it had come to life the weakness seemed to disappear. It even seemed to make the rest of the face more fierce. Edogo went from one part of the crowd to another in the hope that someone would make the comparison he wanted to hear, but no one did. Many people praised the new Mask but no one thought of comparing it with the famous Agaba of Umuagu, if only to say that this one was not as good as that. If Edogo had heard anyone say so he might have been happy. He had not after all set out to excel the greatest carver in Umuaro but he had hoped that someone would link their two names. He began to blame himself for not sitting in the okwolo. There, among the elders, was a more likely place to hear the kind of conversation he was listening for. But it was too late now. The climax of the evening came with the slaughtering of the rams. As a chair was set in the middle of the ilo and the Mask sat down there was comparative silence. Two attendants took up positions on either side of the seated Mask and fanned it. The first ram was led forward and the Mask touched the neck with its matchet. Then it was taken a short distance away but still in full view of the presiding spirit. There was now complete silence except for the flute which, in place of its Arrow of God 201 usual thin and delicate tone, produced broad, broken sounds. Obika came forward, threw up his matchet with a twirl so that it revolved and caught the light of the evening on its blade. He did this twice and each time caught it perfectly in mid-air. Then he stepped forward and with one precise blow severed the rams head. The crowd cheered tumultuously as one of the attendants picked up the head which had rolled in the sand and held it up. The Mask looked on with the same unchanging countenance. When the noisy excitement went down the second ram was brought forward and the Mask again touched its neck. Obikwelu stepped forward. He was nervous because he had dropped his matchet earlier on. He threw it up thrice and caught it perfectly. He stepped forward, raised it and struck. It was as if he had hit a rock; the ram struggled to escape; the crowd booed and laughed. Obikwelu was very unlucky that day. The ram had moved its head at the last moment and he had struck the horn. The Mask looked on unperturbed. Obikwelu tried again and succeeded but it was too late; the laughter of the crowd drowned the few belated cheers. 18 ! After a long period of silent preparation Ezeulu finally revealed that he intended to hit Umuaro at its most vulnerable pointthe Feast of the New Yam. This feast was the end of the old year and the beginning of the new. Before it a man might dig up a few yams around his house to ward off hunger in his family but no one would begin the harvesting of the big farms. And, in any case, no man of title would taste new yam from whatever source before the festival. It reminded the six villages of their coming together in ancient times and of their continuing debt to Ulu who saved them from the ravages of the Abam. At every New Yam feast the coming together of the villages was re-enacted and every grown man in Umuaro took a good-sized seed-yam to the shrine of Ulu and placed it in the heap from his village after circling it round his head; then he took the lump of chalk lying beside the heap and marked his face. It was from these heaps that the elders knew the number of men in each village. If there was an increase over the previous year a Arrow of God 203 sacrifice of gratitude was made to Ulu; but if the number had declined the reason was sought from diviners and a sacrifice of appeasement was ordered. It was also from these yams that Ezeulu selected thirteen with which to reckon the new year. If the festival meant no more than this it would still be the most important ceremony in Umuaro. But it was also the day for all the minor deities in the six villages who did not have their own special feasts. On that day each of these gods was brought by its custodian and stood in a line outside the shrine of Ulu so that any man or woman who had received a favour from it could make a small present in return. This was the one public appearance these smaller gods were allowed in the year. They rode into the market place on the heads or shoulders of their custodians, danced round and then stood side by side at the entrance to the shrine of Ulu. Some of them would be very old, nearing the time when their power would be transferred to new carvings and they would be cast aside; and some would have been made only the other day. The very old ones carried face marks like the men who made them, in the days before Ezeulus grandfather proscribed the custom. At last years festival only three of these ancients were left. Perhaps this year one or two more would disappear, following the men who made them in their own image and departed long ago. The festival thus brought gods and men together in one crowd. It was the only assembly in Umuaro in which a man might look to his right and find his neighbour and look to his left and see a god standing thereperhaps Agwu whose mother also gave birth to madness or Ngene, owner of a stream. Ezeulu had gone out to visit Akuebue when his six assistants came to see him. Matefi told them where he had gone and they decided to wait for him in his obi. It was approaching evening when he returned. Although he knew what must have brought them he feigned surprise. Is it well? he asked after the initial salutations. It is well. An awkward silence followed. Then Nwosisi who represented the village of Umuogwugwu spoke. It was not his custom to waste words. You have asked if all is well and we said yes; but a toad does not run in the daytime unless something is after it. There is a little matter 204 CHINUA ACHEBE which we have decided to bring to you. It is now four days since the new moon appeared in the sky; it is already grown big. And yet you have not called us together to tell us the day of the New Yam Feast By our reckoning, Obiesili took up,the present moon is the twelfth since the last feast. There was silence. Obiesili was always a tactless speaker and no one had asked him to put his mouth into such a delicate matter. Ezeulu cleared his throat and welcomed the people againto show that he was neither in a hurry nor excited. You have done what you should do, he said. If anyone says you have failed in your duty he is telling a lie. A man who asks questions does not lose his way; that is what our fathers taught us. You have done well to come and ask me about this matter which troubles you. But there is something I did not fully understand. You said, Obiesili, just now that according to your reckoning I should have announced the next New Yam Feast at the last new moon. I said so. I see. I thought perhaps I did not hear you well. Since when did you begin to reckon the year for Umuaro? Obiesili did not use his words well, said Chukwulobe. We do not reckon the year for Umuaro; we are not Chief Priest. But we thought that perhaps you have lost count because of your recent absence What! Are you out of your senses, young man? Ezeulu shouted. There is nothing that a man will not hear these days. Lost count! Did your father tell you that the Chief Priest of Ulu can lose count of the moons? No, my son, he continued in a surprisingly mild tone, no Ezeulu can lose count. Rather it is you who count with your fingers who are likely to make a mistake, to forget which finger you counted at the last moon. But as I said at the beginning you have done well to come and ask. Go back to your villages now and wait for my message. I have never needed to be told the duties of the priesthood. If anyone had come into Ezeulus hut after the men had left he would have been surprised. The old priests face glowed with happiness and some of his youth and handsomeness returned temporarily from across the years. His lips moved, letting through an occasional faint whisper. But soon the outside world broke in on him. He stopped Arrow of God 205 whispering and listened more carefully. Nwafo and Obiageli were reciting something just outside his obi. Eke nekwo onye uka! they said over and over again. Ezeulu listened even more carefully. He was not mistaken. Eke nekwo onye uka! Eke nekwo onye uka! Eke nekwo onye uka! Look, its running away! cried Obiageli and the two laughed excitedly. Eke nekwo onye uka! Nekwo onye uka! Nekwo onye uka! Nwafo! shouted Ezeulu. Nna, replied the other fearfully. Come here. Nwafo came in with a tread that would not have killed an ant. Sweat was running down his head and face. Obiageli had melted away the moment Ezeulu called. What were you saying? Nwafo said nothing. His eyelids blinked almost audibly. Are you deaf? I asked you what you were saying. They said that was how to scare away a python. I did not ask you what anybody said. I asked what you were saying. Or do you want me to get up from here before you answer? We were saying: Python, run! There is a Christian here. And what does it mean? Akwuba told us that a python runs away as soon as it hears that. Ezeulu broke into a long, loud laughter. Nwafos relief beamed all over his grimy face. Did it run away when you said it? It ran away fiam like an ordinary snake. The news of Ezeulus refusal to call the New Yam Feast spread through Umuaro as rapidly as if it had been beaten out on the ikolo. At first people were completely stunned by it; they only began to grasp its full meaning slowly because its like had never happened before. Two days later ten men of high title came to see him. None of the ten had taken fewer than three titles, and one of themEzekwesili Ezukanmahad taken the fourth and highest. Only two other men in the entire six villages had this distinction. One of them was too old to 206 CHINUA ACHE BE be present and the other was Nwaka of Umunneora. His absence from this delegation showed how desperate they all were to appease Ezeulu. They came in together, giving the impression that they had already met elsewhere. Before he entered Ezeulus hut each of them planted his iron staff outside and transferred his red cap on to its head. Throughout their deliberation no one came within hearing distance of the hut. Anosi who had wanted to take scraps of gossip to Ezeulu and pick up what he could on the crisis came out of his hut carrying snuff in his left hand and then saw all the red-capped alo staffs outside his neighbours hut. He turned away to visit another neighbour. Ezeulu presented a lump of chalk to his visitors and each of them drew his personal emblem of upright and horizontal lines on the floor. Some painted their big toe and others marked their face. Then he brought them three kolanuts in a wooden bowl. A short formal argument began and ended. Ezeulu took one kolanut, Ezekwesili took the second and Onenyi Nnanyelugo took the third. Each of them offered a short prayer and broke his nut. Nwafo carried the bowl to them in turn and they first put in all the lobes before selecting one. Nwafo carried the bowl round and the rest took a lobe each. After they had all chewed and swallowed their kola Ezekwesili spoke. Ezeulu, the leaders of Umuaro assembled here have asked me to tell you that they are thankful for the kola you gave them. Thank you again and again and may your stock be replenished. The others joined in to say: Thank you, may your stock be replenished. Perhaps you can guess why we have come. It is because of certain stories that have reached our ears; and we thought the best thing was to find out what is true and what is not from the only man who can tell us. The story we have heard is that there is a little disagreement about the next New Yam Feastival. As I said we do not know if it is true or not, but we do know that there is fear and anxiety in Umuaro which if allowed to spread might spoil something. We cannot wait for that to happen; an adult does not sit and watch while the she-goat suffers the pain of childbirth tied to a post. Leaders of Umuaro, have I spoken according to your wish? You have delivered our message. Ezekwesili, called Ezeulu. Arrow of God 207 Eei, answered the man who had just spoken. I welcome you. Your words have entered my ears. Egonwanne. Eei. Nnanyelugo. Eei. Ezeulu called each one by his salutation name. I welcome you all. Your mission is a good one and I thank you. But I have not heard that there is a disagreement about the New Yam feast. My assistants came here two days ago and said it was time to announce the day of the next festival and I told them that it was not their place to remind me. Ezekwesilis head was slightly bowed and he was rubbing his hairless dome. Ofoka had taken his snuff bottle from his pure white goatskin bag and was tipping some of the stuff into his left palm. Nnanyelugo who sat nearest to him rubbed his own palms together to clean them and then presented the left to Ofoka without saying a word. Ofoka turned the snuff from his own hand into Nnanyelugos and tipped out some more for himself. But with you, continued Ezeulu, I need not speak in riddles. You all know what our custom is. I only call a new festival when there is only one yam left from the last. Today I have three yams and so I know that the time has not come. Three or four of the visitors tried to speak at once but the others gave way to Onenyi Nnanyelugo. He saluted everyone by name before he started. I think that Ezeulu has spoken well. Everything he has said entered my ears. We all know the custom and no one can say that Ezeulu has offended against it. But the harvest is ripe in the soil and must be gathered now or it will be eaten by the sun and the weevils. At the same time Ezeulu has just told us that he still has three sacred yams to eat from last year. What then do we do? Howr do you carry a man with a broken waist? We know why the sacred yams are still not finished; it was the work of the white man. But he is not here now to breathe with us the air he has fouled. We cannot go to Okperi and ask him to come and eat the yams that now stand between us and the harvest. Shall we then sit down and watch our harvest ruined and our children and wives die of hunger? No! Although I am not the priest of Ulu I can say that the deity does not want Umuaro to perish. We call him the saver. i i P  M (< p  y y CHINUA 208 ACHEBE Therefore you must find a way out, Ezeulu. If I could I would go now and eat the remaining yams. But I am not the priest of Ulu. It is for you, Ezeulu, to save our harvest. The others murmured their approval. Nnanyelugo. Eei. You have spoken well. But what you ask me to do is not done. Those yams are not food and a man does not eat them because he is hungry. You are asking me to eat death. Ezeulu, said Anichebe Udeozo. We know that such a thing has never been done before but never before has the white man taken the Chief Priest away. These are not the times we used to know and we must meet them as they come or be rolled in the dust. I want you to look round this room and tell me what you see. Do you think there is another Umuaro outside this hut now? No, you are Umuaro, said Ezeulu. Yes, we are Umuaro. Therefore listen to what I am going to say. Umuaro is now asking you to go and eat those remaining yams today and name the day of the next harvest. Do you hear me well? I said go and eat those yams today, not tomorrow; and if Ulu says we have committed an abomination let it be on the heads of the ten of us here. You will be free because we have set you to it, and the person who sets a child to catch a shrew should also find him water to wash the odour from his hand. We shall find you the water. Umuaro, have I spoke well? You have said everything. We shall take the punishment. Leaders of Umuaro, do not say that I am treating your words with contempt; it is not my wish to do so. But you cannot say: do what is not done and we shall take the blame. I am the Chief Priest of Ulu and what I have told you is his will not mine. Do not forget that I too have yamfields and that my children, my kinsmen and my friendsyourselves among themhave also planted yams. It could not be my wish to ruin all these people. It could not be my wish to make the smallest man in Umuaro suffer. But this is not my doing. The gods sometimes use us as a whip. Did Ulu tell you what his annoyance was? Is there no sacrifice that would appease him? I will not hide anything from you. Ulu did say that two new < < p  > y Arrow of God 209 moons came and went and there was no one to break kolanut to him and Umuaro kept silent. What did he expect us to say? asked Ofoka, a little hotly. I dont know what he expected you to say, Ofoka. Nnanyelugo asked me a question and I answered. But if Ulu Let us not quarrel about that, Ofoka. We asked Ezeulu what was Ulus grievance and he has told us. Our concern now should be how to appease him. Let us ask Ezeulu to go back and tell the deity that we have heard his grievance and we are prepared to make amends. Every offence has its sacrifice, from a few cowries to a cow or a human being. Let us wait for an answer. If you ask me to go back to Ulu I shall do so. But I must warn you that a god who demands the sacrifice of a chick might raise it to a goat if you went to ask a second time. Do not say that I am fond of questions, said Ofoka. But I should like to know on whose side you are, Ezeulu. I think you have just said that you have become the whip with which Ulu flogs Umuaro. . . . If you will listen to me, Ofoka, let us not quarrel about that, said Ezekwesili. We have come to the end of our present mission. Our duty now is to watch Ezeulus mouth for a message from Ulu. We have planted our yams in the farm of Anaba-nti. The others agreed and Nnanyelugo deftly steered the conversation to the subject of change. He gave numerous examples of customs that had been altered in the past when they began to work hardship on the people. They all talked at length about these customs which had either died in full bloom or had been stillborn. Nnanyelugo reminded them that even in the matter of taking titles there had been a change. Long, long ago there had been a fifth title in Umuarothe title of king. But the conditions for its attainment had been so severe that no man had ever taken it, one of the conditions being that the man aspiring to be king must first pay the debts of every man and every woman in Umuaro. Ezeulu said nothing throughout this discussion. As he promised the leaders of Umuaro Ezeulu returned to the shrine of Ulu in the morning. He entered the bare, outer room and looked round vacantly. Then he placed his back against the door of the 210 CHINUA ACHEBE inner room which not even his assistants dared enter. The door gave under the pressure of his body and he walked in backwards. He guided himself by running his left hand along one of the side walls. When he got to the end of it he moved a few steps to the right and stood directly in front of the earth mound which represented Ulu. From the rafters right round the room the skulls of all past chief priests looked down on the mound and on their descendant and successor. Even in the hottest day a damp chill always possessed the shrine because of the giant trees outside which put their heads together to cut off the sun, but more especially because of the great, cold, underground river flowing under the earth mound. Even the approaches to the shrine were cold and, all year round, there was always some ntunanya-mili dropping tears from the top of the ancient trees. As Ezeulu cast his string of cowries the bell of Oduches people began to ring. For one brief moment he was distracted by its sad, measured monotone and he thought how strange it was that it should sound so nearmuch nearer than it did in his compound. Ezeulus announcement that his consultation with the deity had produced no result and that the six villages would be locked in the old year for two moons longer spread such alarm as had not been known in Umuaro in living memory. Meanwhile the rains thinned out. There was one last heavy downpour to usher in a new moon. It brought down the harmattan as well, and each new day made the earth harder so that the eventual task of digging up whatever remained of the harvest grew daily. Disagreement was not new in Umuaro. The rulers of the clan had often quarrelled about one thing or another. There was a long-drawnout dispute before face marks were finally abolished and there had been other disagreements of more or less weight before it and since. But none of them had quite filtered down to the groundto the women and even the childrenlike the present crisis. It was not a remote argument which could end one way or the other and still leave the ground untouched. Even children in their mothers belly took sides on this one. Yesterday Nwafo had had to wrestle with his friend, Obielue. It had all started from the moment they went to inspect the bird-snare they had set with resin on the top of two icheku trees. Obielues trap Arrow of God 211 held a very small nza while Nwafos was empty. This had happened before, and Obielue began to boast about his skill. In exasperation Nwafo called him Never-a-dry-season-in-the-nose. Now, Obielue did not care for this name because his nose ran constantly and left the precincts of his nostrils red and sore. He called Nwafo Anthill-nose; but it was not nearly as appropriate as the other and could not be turned into a song as readily. So he put Ezeulus name in the song children sang whenever they saw an Udo ram, one of those fierce animals that belong to the shrine of Udo and could come and go as they wished. Children enjoyed teasing them from a good distance. The song, which was accompanied by the clapping of hands, implored the ram to remove the ugly lumps in its scrotum. To which the singers answered (on behalf of the ram): How does one remove yam tubers? The request and the response were sung in time with the swinging of the tubers. In place of ebunu Obielue sang Ezeulu. Nwafo could not stand this and gave his friend a blow in the mouth which brought blood to his front teeth. Almost overnight Ezeulu had become something of a public enemy in the eyes of all and, as was to be expected, his entire family shared in his guilt. His children came up against it on their way to the stream and his wives suffered hostility in the market. The other day at the Nkwo Matefi had gone to buy a small basket of prepared cassava from Ojinika, wife of Ndulue. She knew Ojinika quite well and had bought from her and sold to her countless times. But on this day Ojinika spoke to her as if she was a stranger from another clan. I shall pay ego nato,  said Matefi. I have told you the price is ego nese.  I think ego nato suits it well; its only a tiny basket. She picked up the basket to show that it was small. Ojinika seemed to have forgotten all about her and was engrossed in arranging her okro in little lots on the mat. What do you say? Put that basket down at once! Then she changed her tone and sneered. You want to take it for nothing. You wait till the yams are ruined and come and buy a basket of cassava for eighteen cowries. Matefi was not the kind of person another woman could tie into her lappa and carry away. She gave Ojinika more than she gottold her the bride-price they paid for her mother. But when she got home she 212 CHINUA ACHEBE began to think about the hostility that was visibly encircling them all in Ezeulus compound. Something told her that someone was going to pay a big price for it and she was afraid. Go and call me Obika, she told her daughter, Ojiugo. She was preparing some cocoyams for thickening soup when Obika came in and sat on the bare floor with his back on the wooden post in the middle of the entrance. He wore a very thin strip of cloth which was passed between the legs and between the buttocks and wound around the waist. He sat down heavily like a tired man. His mother went on with her work of dressing the cocoyams. Ojiugo says you called me. Yes. She went on with what she was doing. To watch you prepare cocoyams? She went on with her work. What is it? I want you to go and talk to your father. About what? About what? About his . . . Are you a stranger in Umuaro? Do you not see the trouble that is coming? What do you expect him to do? To disobey Ulu? I knew you would not listen to me. She managed to hang all her sorrows and disappointments on those words. How can I listen to you when you join outsiders in urging your husband to put his head in a cooking pot? Sometimes I want to agree with those who say the man has caught his mothers madness, said Ogbuefi Ofoka. When he came back from Okperi I went to his house and he talked like a sane man. I reminded him of his saying that a man must dance the dance prevailing in his time and told him that we had come-too lateto accept its wisdom. But today he would rather see the six villages ruined than eat two yams. I have had the same thoughts myself, said Akuebue who was visiting his in-law. I know Ezeulu better than most people. He is a proud man and the most stubborn person you know is only his messenger; but he would not falsify the decision of Ulu. If he did it Ulu would not spare him to begin with. So, I dont know. I have not said that Ezeulu is telling a lie with the name of Ulu or Arrow of God 213 that he is not. What we told him was to go and eat the yams and we would take the consequences. But he would not do it. Why? Because the six villages allowed the white man to take him away. That is the reason. He has been trying to see how he could punish Umuaro and now he has the chance. The house he has been planning to pull down has caught fire and saved him the labour. I do not doubt that he has had a grievance for a long time, but I do not think it goes as deep as this. Remember he has his own yamfields like the rest of us . . . That was what he told us. But, my friend, when a man as proud as this wants to fight he does not care if his own head rolls as well in the conflict. And besides he forgot to mention that whether our harvest is ruined or not we would still take one yam each to Ulu. I dont know. Let me tell you one thing. A priest like Ezeulu leads a god to ruin himself. It has happened before. Oh perhaps a god like Ulu leads a priest to ruin himself. There was one man who saw the mounting crisis in Umuaro as a blessing and an opportunity sent by God. His name was John Jaja Goodcountry, Catechist of St. Marks C.M.S. Church, Umuaro. His home was in the Niger Delta which had been in contact with Europe and the world for hundreds of years. Although he had been in Umuaro only a year he could show as much progress in his church and school as many other teachers and pastors would have been proud to record after five or more years. His catechumen class had grown from a mere fourteen to nearly thirtymostly young men and boys who also went to school. There had been one baptism in St. Marks Church itself and three in the parish church at Okperi. Altogether Mr. Goodcountrys young church provided nine candidates for confirmation, but that was hardly surprising in a new church among some of the most difficult people in the Ibo country. The progress of St. Marks came about in a somewhat unusual way. Mr. Goodcountry with his background of the Niger Delta Pastorate which could already count native martyrs like Joshua Hart to its credit was not prepared to compromise with the heathen over such things as sacred animals. Within weeks of his sojourn in Umuaro he was ready for a little war against the royal python in the same spirit as his own people had fought and conquered the sacred iguana. Unfortunately he 214 CHINUA ACHEBE came up against a local stumbling block in Moses Unachukwu, the most important Christian in Umuaro. From the beginning Mr. Goodcountry had taken exception to Unachukwus know-all airs which the last catechist, Mr. Molokwu, had done nothing to curb. Goodcountry had seen elsewhere how easy it was for a half-educated and half-converted Christian to mislead a whole congregation when the pastor or catechist was weak; so he wanted to establish his leadership from the very beginning. His intention was not originally to antagonize Unachukwu more than was necessary for making his point; after all he was a strong pillar in the church and could not be easily replaced. But Unachukwu did not give Mr. Goodcountry a chance; he challenged him openly on the question of the python and so deserved the public rebuke and humiliation he got. Having made his point Mr. Goodcountry was prepared to forget the whole thing. He had no idea what kind of person he was dealing with. Unachukwu got a clerk in Okperi to write a petition on behalf of the priest of Idemili to the Bishop on the Niger. Although it was called a petition it was more of a threat. It warned the bishop that unless his followers in Umuaro left the royal python alone they would regret the day they ever set foot on the soil of the clan. Being the work of one of the knowledgeable clerks on Government Hill the petition made allusions to such potent words as law and order and the Kings peace. The bishop had just had a very serious situation in another part of his diocese on this same matter of the python. A young, energetic ordinand had led his people on a shrine-burning adventure and had killed a python in the process, whereupon the villagers had chased out all the Christians among them and burnt their houses. Things might have got out of hand had the Administration not stepped in with troops for a show of force. After this incident the Lieutenant Governor had written a sharp letter to the bishop to apply the reins on his boys. For this reason, but also because he did not himself approve of such excess of zeal, the bishop had written a firm letter to Goodcountry. He had also replied to Ezidemilis petition assuring him that the catechist would not interfere with the python but at the same time praying that the day would not be far when the priest and all his people would turn away from the worship of snakes and idols to the true religion. This letter from the big, white priest far away reinforced the view which had been gaining ground that the best way to deal with the Arrow of God 215 white man was to have a few people like Moses Unachukwu around who knew what the white man knew. As a result many peoplesome of them very importantbegan to send their children to school. Even Nwaka sent a sonthe one who seemed least likely among his children to become a good farmer. Mr. Goodcountry not knowing the full story of the deviousness of the heathen mind behind the growth of his school and church put it down to his effective evangelization which, in a way, it wasa vindication of his work against his bishops policy of appeasement. He wrote a report on the amazing success of the Gospel in Umuaro for the West African Church Magazine, although, as was the custom in such reports, he allowed the credit to go to the Holy Spirit. Now Mr. Goodcountry saw in the present crisis over the New Yam Feast an opportunity for fruitful intervention. He had planned his churchs harvest service for the second Sunday in November the proceeds from which would go into the fund for building a place of worship more worthy of God and of Umuaro. His plan was quite simple. The New Yam Festival was the attempt of the misguided heathen to show gratitude to God, the giver of all good things. This was Gods hour to save them from their error which was now threatening to ruin them. They must be told that if they made their thank-offering to God they could harvest their crops without fear of Ulu. So we can tell our heathen brethren to bring their one yam to church instead of giving it to Ulu? asked a new member of Goodcountrys church committee. That is what I say. But not just one yam. Let them bring as many as they wish according to the benefits they received this year from Almighty God. And not only yams, any crop whatsoever or livestock or money. Anything. The man who had asked the question did not seem satisfied. He kept scratching his head. Do you still not understand? I understand but I was thinking how we could tell them to bring more than one yam. You see, our custom, or rather their custom, is to take just one yam to Ulu. Moses Unachukwu, who had since returned to full favour with Goodcountry, saved the day. If Ulu who is a false god can eat one I 2l6 CHINUA ACHEBE yam the living God who owns the whole world should be entitled to eat more than one. So the news spread that anyone who did not want to wait and see all his harvest ruined could take his offering to the god of the Christians who claimed to have power of protection from the anger of Ulu. Such a story at other times might have been treated with laughter. But there was no more laughter left in the people. The first serious sufferers from the postponement of the harvest were the family of Ogbuefi Amalu who had died in the rainy season from aru-mmo. Amalu was a man of substance and, in normal times, the rites of second burial and funeral feast would have followed two or three days after his death. But it was a bad death which killed a man in the time of famine. Amalu himself knew it and was prepared. Before he died he had called his first son, Aneto, and given him directions for the burial feast. I would have said: Do it a day or two after I have been put into the earth. But this is ugani; I cannot ask you to arrange my burial feast with your saliva. I must wait until there are yams again. He spoke with great difficulty, struggling with every breath. Aneto was down on both knees beside the bamboo bed and strained to catch the whispers which were barely audible over the noisy breathing coming from the cavity of the sick mans chest. The many coatings of camwood which had been rubbed on it had caked and cracked like red earth in the dry 218 CHINUA ACHEBE season. But you must not delay it beyond four moons from my death. And do not forget, I want you to slaughter a bull. There was a story told of a young man in another clan who was so pestered by trouble that he decided to consult an oracle. The reason, he was told, was that his dead father wanted him to sacrifice a goat to him. The young man said to the oracle: Ask my father if he left as much as a fowl for me. Ogbuefi Amalu was not like that man. Everyone knew he was worth four hundred bulls and that he had not asked his son for more than was justly due. In anticipation of the New Yam Festival Aneto and his brothers and kinsmen had chosen the day for Amalus second burial and announced it to all Umuaro and to all their relations and in-laws in the neighbouring clans. What were they to do now? Should they persist with their plan and give Amalu a poor mans burial feast without yams and risk his ire on their heads or should they put it off beyond the time that Amalu had appointed and again risk his anger? The second choice seemed the better and the less dangerous one. But to be quite sure Aneto went to afa, to put the alternatives to his father. When he got to the oracle he found that there were not two alternatives but only one. He dared not ask his father whether he would accept a poor mans funeral; rather he asked whether he could delay the rites until there were yams in Umuaro. Amalu said no. He had already stood too long in the rain and sun and could not bear it one day longer. A poor man might wander outside for years while his kinsmen scraped their meagre resources together; that was his penalty for lack of success in his life. But a great man who had toiled through two titles must be called indoors by those for whom he had toiled and for whom he left his riches. Aneto called a kindred meeting and told them what his father had said. No one was surprised. Who would blame Amalu? they asked. Has he not stood outside long enough? No, the fault was Ezeulus. He had seen to it that Amalus kinsmen would waste their substance in buying yams from neighbouring clans when their own crop lay locked in the soil. Many of these neighbouring people were already growing fat out of Umuaros misfortune. Every Nkwo market they brought new yams to Umuaro and sold them like anklets of ivory. At first only men without title, women and children ate these foreign yams. But as the Arrow of God 219 famine grew more harsh and stringent someone pointed out that there was nothing in the custom of Umuaro forbidding a man of title from eating new yams grown on foreign earth; and in any case who was there when they were dug out to swear that they were new yams? This made people laugh with one side of their face. But if there was any man of title who took this advice and ate these yams he made sure that no one saw him. What many of them did do was to harvest the yams planted around their homestead to feed their wives and children. From ancient usage it had always been possible for a man to dig up a few homestead yams in times of severe famine. But today it was not just a few yams and, what was more, the homestead area crept farther and farther afield as the days passed. The plight of Umuaro lay more heavily on Ezeulu and his family than other people knew. In the Chief Priests compound nobody could think of indulging in the many old and new evasions which allowed others to eat an occasional new yam be it local or foreign. Because they were more prosperous than most families they had a larger stock of old yams. But these had long shrivelled into tasteless fibre. Before cooking they had to be beaten with a heavy pestle to separate the wiry strands. Soon even these were finished. But the heaviest load was on Ezeulus mind. He was used to loneliness. As Chief Priest he had often walked alone in front of Umuaro. But without looking back he had always been able to hear their flute and song which shook the earth because it came from a multitude of voices and the stamping of countless feet. There had been moments when the voices were divided as in the land dispute with Okperi. But never until now had he known them to die away altogether. Few people came to his hut now and those who came said nothing. Ezeulu wanted to hear what Umuaro was saying but nobody offered to tell and he would not make anyone think he was curious. So with every passing day Umuaro became more and more an alien silencethe kind of silence which burnt a mans inside like the blue, quiet, razor-edge flame of burning palmnut shells. Ezeulu writhed in the pain which grew and grew until he wanted to get outside his compound or even into the Nkwo market place and shout at Umuaro. Because no one came near enough to him to see his anguishand if they had seen it they would not have understoodthey imagined that he sat in his hut gloating over the distress of Umuaro. But al- 220 CHINUA ACHEBE though he would not for any reason now see the present trend reversed he carried more punishment and more suffering than all his fellows. What troubled him mostand he alone seemed to be aware of it at presentwas that the punishment was not for now alone but for all time. It would afflict Umuaro like an ogulu-aro disease which counts a year and returns to its victim. Beneath all anger in his mind lay a deeper compassion for Umuaro, the clan which long, long ago when lizards were in ones and twos chose his ancestor to carry their deity and go before them challenging every obstacle and confronting every danger on their behalf. Perhaps if the silence in which Ezeulu was trapped had been complete he would have got used to it in time. But it had cracks through which now and again a teasing driblet of news managed to reach him: this had the effect of deepening the silence, like a pebble thrown in a cave. Today Akuebue threw such a pebble. He was the only man among Ezeulus friends and kinsmen who still came now and again to see him. But when he came he sat in silence or spoke about unimportant things. Today, however, he could not but touch on a new development in the crisis which troubled him. Perhaps Akuebue was the only man in Umuaro who knew that Ezeulu was not deliberately punishing the six villages. He knew that the Chief Priest was helpless; that a thing greater than nte had been caught in ntes trap. So whenever he came to visit Ezeulu he kept clear of the things nearest to their thoughts because they were past talking. But today he could not keep silence over the present move of the Christians to reap the harvest of Umuaro. It troubles me, he said, because it looks like the saying of our ancestors that when brothers fight to death a stranger inherits their fathers estate. What do you expect me to do? Ezeulu opened both palms towards his friend. If any man in Umuaro forgets himself so far as to join them let him carry on. Akuebue shook his head in despair. As soon as he left Ezeulu called Oduche and asked him if it was true that his people were offering sanctuary to those who wished to escape the vengeance of Ulu. Oduche said he did not understand. You do not understand? Are your people saying to Umuaru that if Arrow of God 221 anyone brings his sacrifice to your shrine he will be safe to harvest his yams? Now do you understand? Yes. Our teacher told them so. Your teacher told them so? Did you report it to me? No. Why? Silence. I said why did you not report it to me? For a long time father and son looked steadily at each other in silence. When Ezeulu spoke again his tone was calm and full of grief. Do you remember, Oduche, what I told you when I sent you among those people? Oduche shifted his eyes to the big toe of his right foot which he placed a little forward. Since you have become dumb let me remind you. I called you as a father calls his son and told you to go and be my eye and ear among those people. I did not send Obika or Edogo; I did not send Nwafo, your mothers son. I called you by name and you came herein this obiand I sent you to see and hear for me. I did not know at that time that I was sending a goats skull. Go away, go back to your mothers hut. I have no spirit for talking now. When I am ready to talk I shall tell you what I think. Go away and rejoice that your father cannot count on you. I say, go away from here, lizard that ruined his mothers funeral. Oduche went out at the brink of tears. Ezeulu felt a slight touch of comfort. At last another new moon came and he ate the twelfth yam. The next morning he sent word to his assistants to announce that the New Yam feast would be eaten in twenty-eight days. Throughout that day the drums beat in Amalus compound because the funeral feast was tomorrow. The sound reached every village in Umuaro to remind them; not that anyone needed reminding at such a time when men were as hungry as locusts. In the night Ezeulu dreamt one of those strange dreams which were more than ordinary dreams. When he woke up everything stood out with the detail and clarity of daylight, like the one he had dreamt in Okperi. 222 CHINUA ACHEBE He was sitting in his obi. From the sound of the voices the mourners seemed to be passing behind his compound, beyond the tall, red walls. This worried him a good deal because there was no path there. Who were these people then who made a path behind his compound? He told himself that he must go out and challenge them because it was said that unless a man wrestled with those who walked behind his compound the path never closed. But he lacked resolution and stood where he was. Meanwhile the voices and the drums and the flutes grew louder. They sang the song with which a man was carried to the bush for burial: Look! a python Look! a python Yes, it lies across the way.  As usual the song came in different waves like gusts of storm following on each others heels. The mourners in front sang a little ahead of those in the middle near the corpse and these were again ahead of those at the rear. The drums came with this last wave. Ezeulu raised his voice to summon his family to join him in challenging the trespassers but his compound was deserted. His irresolution turned into alarm. He ran into Matefis hut but all he saw were the ashes of a long-dead fire. He rushed out and ran into Ugoyes hut calling her and her children but her hut was already falling in and a few blades of green grass had sprouted on the thatch. He was running towards Obikas hut when a new voice behind the compound brought him to a sudden halt. The noise of the burial party had since disappeared in the distance. But beside the sorrow of the solitary voice that now wailed after them they might have been returning with a bride. The sweet agony of the solitary singer settled like dew on the head. I was born when lizards were in ones and twos A child of Idemili. The difficult tear-drops Of Skys first weeping drew my spots. Being Sky-born I walked the earth with royal gait And mourners saw me coiled across their path. But of late A strange bell Has been ringing a song of desolation: Leave your yams and cocoyams Arrow of God 223 And come to school. And I must scuttle away in haste When children in play or in earnest cry: Look! a Christian is on the way. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha . . . The singers sudden, demented laughter filled Ezeulus compound and he woke up. In spite of the cold harmattan he was sweating. But he felt an enormous relief to be awake and know that it had been a dream. The blind alarm and the life-and-death urgency fell away from it at the threshold of waking. But a vague fear remained because the voice of the python had ended as the voice of Ezeulus mother when she was seized with madness. Nwanyi Okperi, as they called her in Umuaro, had been a great singer in her youth, making songs for her village as easily as some people talked. In later life when her madness came on her these old songs and others she might have made forced themselves out in eccentric spurts through the cracks in her mind. Ezeulu in his childhood lived in fear of these moments when his mothers feet were put in stocks, at the new moon. The passage of Ogbazulobodo at that moment helped in establishing Ezeulu in the present. Perhaps it was the effect of the dream, but in all his life he had never heard a night spirit pass with this fury. It was like a legion of runners each covered from neck to ankle with strings of rattling ekpili. It came from the direction of the ilo and disappeared towards Nkwo. It must have seen signs of light in someones compound for it seemed to stop and cry: Ewo okuo! Ewo okuo! The offender whoever it was must have quickly put out the light, and the pacified spirit continued its flight and soon disappeared in the night. Ezeulu wondered why it had not saluted him when it passed near his compound. Or perhaps it did before he woke up. After the dream and the commotion of Ogbazulobodos passage he tried in vain to sleep again. Then they began to fire the cannon in Amalus place. Ezeulu counted nine claps separated by the beating of ekwe. By that time sleep had completely left his eyes. He got up and groped for the latch of his carved door and opened it. Then he took his matchet and his bottle of snuff from the head of the bed and groped his way to the outer room. There he felt the dry chill of the harmattan. 224 CHINUA ACHEBE Fortunately the fire had not died from the two big ukwa logs. He stoked it and produced a small flame. No other person in the village could carry the ogbazulobodo as well as Obika. Whenever somebody else tried there was a big difference: either the speed was too slow or the words stuck in his throat. For the power of the ike-agwu-ani, great though it was, could not change a crawling millipede into an antelope nor a dumb man into an orator. That was why in spite of the great grievance which Amalus family nursed against Ezeulu and his family Aneto still came to beg Obika to run as ogbazulobodo on the night before his fathers second burial. I do not want to say no to you, said Obika after Aneto had spoken, but this is not something a man can do when his body is not all his. Since yesterday I have been having a little fever. I do not know what it is but everybody you see nowadays sounds like a broken pot, said Aneto. Why not ask Nweke Ukpaka to run for you? I knew about Nweke Ukpaka when I came to see you. I even passed by his house. Obika considered the matter. There are many people who can do it, said Aneto. But he whose name is called again and again by those trying in vain to catch a wild bull has something he alone can do to bulls. True, said Obika. I agree but I am agreeing in cowardice. If I say no, Obika told himself, they will say that Ezeulu and his family have revealed a second time their determination to wreck the burial of their village man who did no harm to them. He did not tell his wife that he would be going out that night until he had eaten his evening meal. Obika always went into his wifes hut to eat his meals. His friends teased him about it and said the woman had spoilt his head. Okuata was polishing off the soup in her bowl when Obika spoke. She crooked her first finger once more, wiped the bowl with it, stretched it again and ran it down her tongue. Going out with this fever? she asked. Obika have pity on yourself. The funeral is tomorrow. What is there they cannot do without you until morning? I shall not stay long. Aneto is my age mate and I must go and see how he is preparing. Arrow of God 225 Okuata maintained a sullen silence. Bar the door well. Nobody will carry you away. I shall not stay long. The ekwe-ogbazulobodo sounded kome kome kokome kome kokome and continued for a while warning anyone still awake to hurry up to bed and put out every light because light and ogbazulobodo were mortal enemies. When it had beaten long enough for all to hear it stopped. Silence and the shrill call of insects seized the night again. Obika and the others who would carry the ayaka spirit-chorus sat on the lowest run of the okwolo steps talking and laughing. The man who beat the ekwe joined them, leaving his drum in the half-light of the palm-oil torch. When the ekwe began to beat out the second and final warning Obika was still talking with the others as though it did not concern him. The old man, Ozumba, who kept the regalia of the night spirits took a position near the drummer. Then he raised his cracked voice and called ugoli four or five times as if to clear the cobweb from it. Then he asked if Obika was there. Obika looked in his direction and saw him vaguely in the weak light. Slowly and deliberately he got up and went to Ozumba, and stood before him. Ozumba bent down and took up a skirt made of a network of rope and heavily studded with rattling ekpili. Obika raised both arms above his head so that Ozumba could tie the skirt round his waist without hindrance. When this was done Ozumba waved his arms about like a blind man until they struck the iron staff. He pulled it out of the ground and placed it in Obikas right hand. The ekwe continued to beat in the half-light of the palm-oil torch. Obika closed his hand tight on the staff and clenched his teeth. Ozumba allowed him a little more time to prepare himself fully. Then very slowly he lifted the ike-agwu-ani necklace. The ekwe beat faster and faster. Obika held his head forward and Ozumba put the ike-agwu-ani round his neck. As he did so he said:  Tun-tun gem-gem Oso mgbada bu nugwu. The speed of the deer Is seen on the hill. 226 CHINUA ACHEBE As soon as these words left his mouth Ogbazuiobodo swung round and cried: Ewo okuo!Ewo okuo! The drummer threw down his sticks and hastily blew out the offending light. The spirit planted the staff into the earth and it reverberated. He pulled it out again and vanished like the wind in the direction of Nkwo leaving potent words in the air behind. The fly that struts around on a mound of excrement wastes his time; the mound will always be greater than the fly. The thing that beats the drum for ngwesi is inside the ground. Darkness is so great it gives horns to a dog. He who builds a homestead before another can boast more broken pots. It is ofo that gives rain-water power to cut dry earth. The man who walks ahead of his fellows spots spirits on the way. Bat said he knew his ugliness and chose to fly by night. When the air is fouled by a man on top of a palm tree the fly is confused. An ill-fated man drinks water and it catches in his teeth. . . . He was at once blind and full of sight. He did not see any of the landmarks like trees and huts but his feet knew perfectly where they were going; he did not leave out even one small path from the accustomed route. He knew it without the use of eyes. He only stopped once when he smelt light. . . . Even while people are still talking about the man Rat bit to death Lizard takes money to have his teeth filed. He who sees an old hag squatting should leave her alone; who knows how she breathes? White Ant chews igbegulu because it is lying on the ground; let him climb the palm tree and chew. He who will swallow udula. seeds must consider the size of his anus. The fly that has no one to advise him follows the corpse into the ground. . . . A fire began to rage inside his chest and to push a dry bitterness up his mouth. But he tasted it from a distance or from a mouth within his mouth. He felt like two separate persons, one running above the other. . . . When a handshake passes the elbow it becomes another thing. The sleep that lasts from one market day to another has become death. The man who likes the meat of the funeral ram, why does he recover when sickness visits him? The mighty tree falls and the little birds scatter in the bush. . . . The little bird which hops off the ground and lands on an ant-hill may not know it but is still on the ground. ... A common snake which a man sees all alone may become a python in his eyes. . . . The very Thing which kills Mother Rat is always there to make sure that its young ones never open their eyes. . . .The boy who persists in asking what happened to his father before he has enough strength to avenge him is asking for his fathers fate. . . . The man who Arrow of God 227 belittles the sickness which Monkey has suffered should ask to see the eyes which his nurse got from blowing the sick fire. . . . When death wants to take a little dog it prevents it from smelling even excrement. . . . The eight men who would sing the ayaka chorus were still talking where Obika left them. Ozumba had come to sit with them to await his return. They were talking about the big bull which Amalus children had bought for his funeral when they heard the voice already coming back. The ayaka men scrambled to their feet and got ready to break into song as soon as Ogbazulobodo re-entered the ilo. They were all amazed that he was already returning. Had he left out any of the paths? Not Obika, said Ozumba proudly. He is a sharp one. Give me a sharp boy even though he breaks utensils in his haste. This was hardly out of his mouth when Ogbazulobodo raced in and fell down at the foot of the okwolo. Ozumba removed the necklace from his neck and called his name. But Obika did not answer. He called again and touched his chest. They poured some of the cold water which was always kept handy over his face and body. The song of the ayaka had stopped as abruptly as it had started. They all stood around unable yet to talk. The first cock had not crowed. Ezeulu was still in his obi. The fire still glowed on the big logs but the flame had long gone out. Were those footsteps he was hearing? He listened carefully. Yes, they were getting louder, and voices too. He felt for his matchet. What could this be? Who? he called. The footsteps stopped, and the voices. For a moment there was silence, heavy with the presence of the strangers outside in the dark. People, said a voice. Who is called people? My gun is loaded, let me warn people. Ezeulu, it is me, Ozumba. Ozumba. Eh. What brings you out at this time? An abomination has overtaken us. Goat has eaten palm leaves from off my head. Ezeulu merely cleared his throat and began slowly to stoke the fire. Let me build a fire to see your faces. One of the sticks of firewood 228 CHINUA ACHEBE was too long and he broke it across his knee. He blew the fire a few times and it broke into a flame. Come in and let me hear what you are saying. As soon as he saw Obikas body coming in under the low eaves he sprang to his feet and took up his matchet. What happened to him? Who did this? I said who? Ozumba began to explain but Ezeulu did not hear. The matchet fell from his hand and he slumped down on both knees beside the body. My son, he cried. Ulu, were you there when this happened to me? He hid his face on Obikas chest. When the first light came nearly every arrangement had been made for the announcement of the death. The village death-drums were leaning against a wall. A bottle of gun-powder had been found and put aside. Ezeulu wandered up and down among the busy people trying to help. At one point he found the long broom they used paddle-wise to sweep the compound, took it up and began to sweep. But someone took it from him and led him by the hand back to his hut. People will soon be here, he said weakly, and the place is still unswept. Leave it to me. I shall find somebody to do it straight away. Obikas death shook Umuaro to the roots; a man like him did not come into the world too often. As for Ezeulu it was as though he had died. Some people expected Ezidemili to be jubilant. Such people did not know him. He was not that kind of man and besides he knew too y well the danger of such exultation. All he was heard to say quietly was: This should teach him how far he could dare next time. But for Ezeulu there was no next time. Think of a man who, unlike lesser men, always goes to battle without a shield because he knows that bullets and matchet strokes will glance off his medicine-boiled skin; think of him discovering in the thick of battle that the power has suddenly, without warning, deserted him. What next time can there be? Will he say to the guns and the arrows and the matchets: Hold! I want to return quickly to my medicine-hut and stir the pot and find out what has gone wrong; perhaps someone in my householda child, maybehas unwittingly violated my medicines taboo? No. Arrow of God 229 Ezeulu sank to the ground in utter amazement. It was not simply the blow of Obikas death, great though it was. Men had taken greater blows: that was what made a man a man. For did they not say that a man is like a funeral ram which must take whatever beating comes to it without opening its mouth; that the silent tremor of pain down its body alone must tell of its suffering? At any other time Ezeulu would have been more than a match to his grief. He would have been equal to any pain not compounded with humiliation. But why, he asked himself again and again, why had Ulu chosen to deal thus with him, to strike him down and then cover him with mud? What was his offence? Had he not divined the gods will and obeyed it? When was it ever heard that a child was scalded by the piece of yam its own mother put in its palm? What man would send his son with a potsherd to bring fire from a neighbours hut and then unleash rain on him? Who ever sent his son up the palm to gather nuts and then took an axe and felled the tree? But today such a thing had happened before the eyes of all. What could it point to but the collapse and ruin of all things? Then a god, finding himself powerless, might take flight and in one final, backward glance at his abandoned worshippers cry: If the rat cannot flee fast enough Let him make way for the tortoise! Perhaps it was the constant, futile throbbing of these thoughts that finally left a crack in Ezeulus mind. Or perhaps his implacable assailant having stood over him for a little while stepped on him as on an insect and crushed him under the heel in the dust. But this final act of malevolence proved merciful. It allowed Ezeulu, in his last days, to live in the haughty splendour of a demented high priest and spared him knowledge of the final outcome. Meanwhile Winterbottom, after a recuperative leave in England had returned to his seat and married the doctor. He did not ever hear of Ezeulu again. The only man who might have carried the story to Government Hill was John Nwodika, his steward. But John had since left Winterbottoms service to set up a small trade in tobacco. It looked as though the gods and the powers of event finding Winterbottom handy had used him and left him again in order as they found him. 230 CHINUA ACHEBE So in the end only Umuaro and its leaders saw the final outcome. To them the issue was simple. Their god had taken sides with them against his headstrong and ambitious priest and thus upheld the wisdom of their ancestorsthat no man however great was greater than his people; that no one ever won judgement against his clan. If this was so then Ulu had chosen a dangerous time to uphold that truth for in destroying his priest he had also brought disaster on himself, like the lizard in the fable who ruined his mothers funeral by his own hand. For a deity who chose a moment such as this to chastise his priest or abandon him before his enemies was inciting people to take liberties; and Umuaro was just ripe to do so. The Christian harvest which took place a few days after Obikas death saw more people than even Goodcountry could have dreamed. In his extremity many a man sent his son with a yam or two to offer to the new religion and to bring back the promised immunity. Thereafter any yam harvested in his fields was harvested in the name of the son. About the Author Chinua Achebe was born in Nigeria in 1930. He was raised in the large village of Ogidi, one of the first centers of Anglican missionary work in Eastern Nigeria, and is a graduate of University College, Ibadan. His early career in radio ended abruptly in 1966, when he left his post as Director of External Broadcasting in Nigeria during the national upheaval that lead to the Biafran War. Mr. Achebe joined the Biafran Ministry of Information and represented Biafra on various diplomatic and fund-raising missions. He was appointed Senior Research Fellow at the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, and began lecturing widely abroad. From 1972 to 1976, and again in 1987-88, Mr. Achebe was a Professor of English at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and also for one year at the University of Connecticut, Storrs. Characterized by the New York Times Magazine as one of Nigerias most gifted writers, Chinua Achebe has published novels, short stories, essays, and childrens books. His volume of poetry, Christmas in Biafra, written during the Biafran War, was the joint winner of the first Commonwealth Poetry Prize. Of his novels, Arrow of God is winner of the New Statesman-Jock Campbell Award, and Anthills of the Savannah was a finalist for the 1987 Booker Prize in England. Mr. Achebe has received numerous honors from around the world, including the Honorary Fellowship of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, as well as eleven honorary doctorates from universities in England, Scotland, the United States, Canada, and Nigeria. He is also the recipient of Nigerias highest award for intellectual achievement, the Nigerian National Merit Award. Mr. Achebe lives with his wife in Nigeria. They have four children. FICTION PRAISE FOR CHINUA ACHEBE a Chinua Achebe is a magical writerone of tl^e greatest of the twentieth century. It is a measure of Achebes creative gift that he has no need whatever for prose fireworks to light the flame of his intense drama. Worthy of particular attention are the characters. Achebe doesnt create his people with fastidiously detailed line drawings: instead, he relies on a few short strokes that highlight whatever prominent features will bring the total personality into three-dimensional life. TIME u The power and majesty of Chinua Achebes work has, literally, opened the world to generations of readers. He is an ambassador of art, and a profound recorder of the human condition. MICHAEL DORRIS He is one of the few writers of our time who has touched us with a code of values that will never be ironic. This great voice. - COVER ILLUSTRATION BY JOE BAKER/THE DESIGN MINISTRY
<|book_end|>

<|book_start|>
CHAPTER ONE _First Witness--Christopher Oriko__ 'YOU'RE WASTING EVERYBODY'S TIME, Mr. Commissioner for Information. I will not go to Abazon. Finish! _Kabisa!__ Any other business?' 'As Your Excellency wishes. But ...' 'But me no buts, Mr. Oriko! The matter is closed, I said. How many times, for God's sake, am I expected to repeat it? Why do _you__ find it so difficult to swallow my ruling. On anything?' 'I am sorry, Your Excellency. But I have no difficulty swallowing _and__ digesting your rulings.' For a full minute or so the fury of his eyes lay on me. Briefly our eyes had been locked in combat. Then I had lowered mine to the shiny table-top in ceremonial capitulation. Long silence. But he was not appeased. Rather he was making the silence itself grow rapidly into its own kind of contest, like the eyewink duel of children. I conceded victory there as well. Without raising my eyes I said again: 'I am very sorry, Your Excellency.' A year ago I would never have said it again that second time--without doing grave violence to myself. Now I did it like a casual favour to him. It meant nothing at all to me--no inconvenience whatever--and yet everything to him. I have thought of all this as a game that began innocently enough and then went suddenly strange and poisonous. But I may prove to be too sanguine even in that. For, if I am right, then looking back on the last two years it should be possible to point to a specific and decisive event and say: it was at such and such a point that everything went wrong and the rules were suspended. But I have not found such a moment or such a cause although I have sought hard and long for it. And so it begins to seem to me that this thing probably never was a game, that the present was there from the very beginning only I was too blind or too busy to notice. But the real question which I have often asked myself is why then do I go on with it now that I can see. I don't know. Simple inertia, maybe. Or perhaps sheer curiosity: to see where it will all ... well, end. I am not thinking so much about him as about my colleagues, eleven intelligent, educated men who let this happen to them, who actually went out of their way to invite it, and who even at this hour have seen and learnt nothing, the cream of our society and the hope of the black race. I suppose it is for them that I am still at this silly observation post making farcical entries in the crazy log-book of this our ship of state. Disenchantment with them turned long ago into detached clinical interest. I find their actions not merely bearable now but actually interesting, even exciting. Quite amazing! And to think that I personally was responsible for recommending nearly half of them for appointment! And of course, complete honesty demands that I mention one last factor in my continued stay, a fact of which I'm somewhat ashamed, namely that I couldn't be writing this if I didn't hang around to observe it all. And no one else would. I could read in the silence of their minds, as we sat stiffly around the mahogany table, words like: _Well, this is going to be another of those days.__ Meaning a bad day. Days are good or bad for us now according to how His Excellency gets out of bed in the morning. On a bad day, such as this one had suddenly become after many propitious auguries, there is nothing for it but to lie close to your hole, ready to scramble in. And particularly to keep your mouth shut, for nothing is safe, not even the flattery we have become such experts in disguising as debate. On my right sat the Honourable Commissioner for Education. He is by far the most frightened of the lot. As soon as he had sniffed peril in the air he had begun to disappear into his hole, as some animals and insects do, backwards. Instinctively he had gathered his papers together and was in the very act of lifting the file-cover over them and dragging them into his hole after him when his entire body suddenly went rigid. Stronger alarms from deeper recesses of instinct may have alerted him to the similarity between his impending act and a slamming of the door in the face of His Excellency. A fantastic thing happened then. He drops the file-cover in such panic that everyone now turns to him and sees him perform the strangest act of all: the scattering again of his Council Papers in panic atonement and restitution for the sacrilege he has come so close to committing. Inadvertently. Then he glances round the table until his eyes meet His Excellency's and fall dead on the mahogany. The silence had not been broken since my second apology. I was quite certain that the poor fellow (never a strong one for originality) was getting ready to speak my very words, strictly in the same sequence. I swear it. He had drawn his upper arms tight to his sides as though to diminish his bulk; and clasped his hands before him like a supplicant. But His Excellency speaks instead. And not even to him the latest offender but still to me. And he is almost friendly and conciliatory, the amazing man. In that instant the day changes. The fiery sun retires temporarily behind a cloud; we are reprieved and immediately celebrating. I can hear in advance the many compliments we will pay him as soon as his back is turned: that the trouble with His Excellency is that he can never hurt a man and go to sleep over it. That's one refinement, by the way, we've not yet lost: we do wait for his back to be turned. And some will add: That's a pity because what this country really needs is a ruthless dictator. At least for five good years. And we will all laugh in loud excess because we know--bless our dear hearts--that we shall never be favoured with such an undeserved blessing as a ruthless dictator 'Do you realize what you are asking me to do, Chris?' he said. I say nothing, make no motion, not even of the head. At these moments my head assumes the gravity of granite and though my thinking might remain perfectly clear and logical it seems to emanate from afar taking in these happenings through a telescope. I note for what it's worth that he has dropped the icy distancing of _Mister Commissioner__ and _Mister Oriko__. But I no longer allow such niceties to distract me. He misread my quietude I think as either agreement or disagreement. It was neither. Pure, unadulterated disinterest. 'You are telling me to insult the intelligence of these people,' he says, his tone mollified and rather superior. I shake my head then, slowly. 'Yes, that's precisely what you are telling me to do,' he says spiritedly, spurred to battle by my faint resurgent opposition. 'These people believe in rain-makers and so let's go ahead and exploit their ignorance for cheap popularity. That's exactly what you are telling me to do, Chris. Well I can't do it. You all seem to forget that I am still a soldier, not a politician.' He is in mufti as he now tends to be more and more within the precincts of the Presidential Palace: a white _danshiki__ tastefully embroidered in gold, and its matching trousers. By contrast many of my colleagues especially the crew from the Universities aspire to the military look. Professor Okong wears nothing but khaki safari suits complete with epaulettes. It is amazing how the intellectual envies the man of action. I think His Excellency noticed the faint smile brought to my face by that reminder that he was still a soldier; he has such a knack for reading faces. I could see him hesitate ever so briefly between taking me up on that smile and ignoring it. What he ended up doing was neither of those but something really quite proficient. Fixing his gaze on me he yet managed at the same time to convey by his voice that I was excluded from what he was now saying; that his words were too precious to waste on professional dissidents. 'Soldiers are plain and blunt,' he says defiantly. 'When we turn affairs of state back to you and return to barracks that will be the time to resume your civilian tricks. Have a little patience.' At this point he is boldly interrupted by the Commissioner for Justice and Attorney-General and then by everybody else with an assortment of protests. Actually it is His Excellency's well-chosen words that signalled the brave interruption, for despite the vigour in his voice the words themselves had sounded the _All Clear__ and told us it was all right now to commence our protestations. So we began to crawl out into the open again. In his precise manner the Attorney-General says: 'Your Excellency, let us not flaunt the wishes of the people.' 'Flout, you mean,' I said. 'The people?' asked His Excellency, ignoring my piece of pedantry. 'Yes, Your Excellency,' replied the Attorney-General boldly. 'The people have spoken. Their desire is manifest. You are condemned to serve them for life.' Loud applause and shouts of 'Hear! Hear!' Many voices in contest for the floor. 'I am no lawyer,' says His Excellency, his slightly raised tone breaking up a hand to hand tussle among the voices, 'only a simple soldier. But a soldier must keep his word.' 'But you, I beg pardon, I mean Your Excellency, cannot break a word you never even said. The nonsense about one hundred per cent was only the machination of a newspaper editor who in my judgement is a self-seeking saboteur.' 'No obligation, Your Excellency, to keep faith with heretics,' boomed the Reverend Professor Okong's voice. 'On point of order, Your Excellency.' He glares at me now, and then nods to the Attorney-General, who had been interrupted by Okong and myself, to continue. 'Your Excellency, three provinces out of four is a majority anywhere.' More applause. 'Your Excellency I wish to dissociate myself from the Attorney-General's reference to a saboteur and to appeal to my colleagues not to make such statements against public servants who are not present to defend themselves.' I liked the look of terror on my colleagues' faces when I used the word _dissociate__ and the relaxation that followed when they realized that I was not saying what they feared I was saying. Even His Excellency was thrown off his poise momentarily. But, unlike the rest, knowing that he has been teased does not amuse him or offer him relief; rather it fills him with anger. He swings his head sharply to his right where the Chief Secretary sits on the edge of his chair. 'Any other business?' The way he says it this time it no longer is an idle formula. It had the ring of a rebuke: something like _How many times do you want me to ask this question?__ This unexpected convergence of the crisis on his person threw the Chief Secretary into utter confusion and inelegance of speech. 'Oh no sir. Nothing at all, sir. Your Excellency.' And then he looks across the table and our eyes meet. I don't like to take credit for this kind of thing but I think that the derisive smile on my face at that moment may have turned the bureaucrat right about. Perhaps he saw in my face a foreshadowing of peer taunts and ridicule lying in ambush for him beyond the massive doors of this citadel. He is very sensitive about accusations of boot-licking especially when they come from me because I think he has a lot of respect for me. And in a way I don't dislike him, either. He is after all, unlike the rest of us, a career civil servant who would have served a civilian president ... or indeed the British raj ... as well as he now serves His present Excellency. But whatever it was that did it he now shows totally untypical spirit that for him almost borders on recklessness. He picks up his fallen words again: 'But Your Excellency, if I may--erm--crave your indulgence--erm-Your Excellency's indulgence--and--erm--put in a word for the Honourable Commissioner.' 'Which Honourable Commissioner? There are twelve of them, you know.' This would have excited laughter at other times, but something totally new is happening now and we are all too amazed. 'Your Excellency I mean the Honourable Commissioner for Information.' There is a long and baffled silence. Then His Excellency who, I should admit, is extremely good at such times says: 'He doesn't need a word from you. Remember, he owns all the words in this country--newspapers, radio and television stations ...' The peals of laughter that broke out engulfed everybody for minutes and put us all at ease again. Colleagues close enough were laughing and slapping my back. Others beamed their goodwill across. 'The Honourable Commissioner for Words,' the Attorney-General manages through his laughter. 'That's a good one. By God that's a good one.' He is dabbing his eyes with a handkerchief still neatly folded. 'Opposed! It sounds too much like me,' protested the Commissioner for Works. 'That's true,' says the Attorney-General, pausing in his laughter to reflect. 'Commissioner for Words and Commissioner for Works. There's a point there.' 'Theologically speaking there is a fundamental distinction.' This is Professor Okong in his deep pulpit voice. 'Ah, Professor done come-o,' says the Commissioner for Education. We were all so merry. If the meeting ended now we would go home happy--the homely ones among us entitled to answer their wives with a smile should they ask what kind of day they'd had. But His Excellency wasn't done with us yet, alas! 'What were you going to say for the Commissioner of Information, anyway?' 'Your Excellency, it is--erm--about this visit to Abazon.' 'In that case the meeting stands adjourned.' He gets up abruptly. So abruptly that the noise we make scrambling to our feet would have befitted a knee-sore congregation rising rowdily from the prayers of a garrulous priest. His Excellency sits down again and leans back calmly on his swivel chair in order to search under the table for the court shoes he always kicks off at the beginning of our meetings and which the Chief Secretary as always and quite unobtrusively arranges side by side with movements of his own feet to save His Excellency the trouble of prolonged searching at the end of the meeting. If His Excellency is aware of this little service he never acknowledges it, but takes it for granted like the attention of the invisible bell-boy who shines your shoes overnight in an expensive hotel. With consummate deliberation he looks down to the floor and slips in his right foot. He looks on the other side and slips in his left. And then discarding altogether the sprightliness of his first rising he now heaves himself slowly up by the leverage of his hands on the heavy arms of his chair. And the amazing thing is that this lumbering slowness and the former alacrity seem equally to become him. We all stand stock-still. The only noise in the room comes from his own movements and the continuous whirring of the air-conditioners which have risen to attention in the silence of a deferential Cabinet waiting with bated breath on the Chief to become shod again and, in his good time, withdraw into the seclusion of his adjoining private enclosure. Sometimes he would say _Good afternoon, gentlemen__ on taking leave of us. Today, naturally, he said nothing. As he left his seat an orderly gathered up his papers quickly and followed him out. Another orderly, more stern-faced, opened the heavy doors of carved panels, stood aside and gave a long, hand-quivering salute. 'He is not in a good mood today,' says the Chief Secretary, breaking the freeze. 'We'll bring it up again next Thursday, Chris. Don't worry.' His Excellency is probably meant to overhear this and I believe he does. I could see a smile or the radiance of a smile from the back of his head like the faint memory of light at the edges of an eclipse. In the final stages of His Excellency's retiring, the silence in the Council Chamber seemed to be undergoing a subtle change. Something indeterminate had entered it and was building up slowly within its ambience. At first I thought the air-conditioners had become just fractionally louder which would be perfectly consistent with the generating vagaries of the National Electric Power Authority. Then the Chief Secretary's observation and the flurry of conversation it started about His Excellency's changing moods kept us from noticing the sound for a while. The Attorney-General came over to my seat and clapped me on the shoulder. 'What's the matter with you, Chris? Why are you so tense these days? Relax, man, relax; the world isn't coming to an end, you know.' I was angrily but silently rebuffing his peace overtures when, as though on a signal, everyone in the room stopped talking. Then we all turned to the east window. 'A storm?' someone asks. The low hibiscus hedge outside the window and its many brilliant red bells stood still and unruffled. Beyond the hedge the courtyard with its concrete slabs and neatly manicured bahama grass at the interstices showed no flying leaves or dust. Beyond the courtyard another stretch of the green and red hedge stood guard against the one-story east wing of the Presidential Palace. Over and beyond the roof the tops of palm-trees at the waterfront swayed with the same lazy ease they display to gentle ocean winds. It was no ordinary storm. The Chief Secretary whose presence of mind is only inhibited by the presence of His Excellency moves over to the sill, unhooks a latch and pushes back a glass window. And the world surges into the alien climate of the Council Chamber on a violent wave of heat and the sounds of a chanting multitude. And His Excellency rushes back into the room at the same time leaving the huge doors swinging. 'What is going on?' he demands, frantically. 'I shall go and see, Your Excellency,' says the Inspector-General of Police, picking up his peaked cap from the table, putting it on his head and then his baton under his arm and saluting at attention. 'Look at him! Just look at him,' sneers His Excellency. 'Gentlemen, this is my Chief of Police. He stands here gossiping while hoodlums storm the Presidential Palace. And he has no clue what is going on. Sit down! Inspector-General of Police!' He turns to me. 'Do you know anything about this?' 'I am sorry I don't, Your Excellency.' 'Beautiful. Just beautiful. Now can anyone here tell me anything about that crowd screaming out there?' He looks at each of us in turn. No one stirs or opens his mouth. 'That's what I mean when I say that I have no Executive Council. Can you see what I mean now, all of you? Take your seats, gentlemen, and stay there!' He rushes out again. At the door he is saluted again by the orderly of the quivering hands. Perhaps it is the way the fellow closes those heavy doors now like a gaoler or perhaps some other subtle movement or gesture with the sub-machine-gun in his left hand that drew from the Attorney-General a deep forlorn groan: 'Oh my God!' I put on a broad smile and flash it in his face. He backs away from me as from a violent lunatic. Very few words are spoken in the next half hour. When the doors swing open again, an orderly announces: _Professor Okong Wanted by His Excellency!__ 'I go to prepare a place for you, gentlemen ... But rest assured I will keep the most comfortable cell for myself.' He went out laughing. I too began to laugh quite ostentatiously. Then I said to my colleagues: 'That is a man after my heart. A man who will not piss in his trousers at the first sound of danger.' And I went to the furthest window and stood there alone gazing outwards. Professor Reginald Okong, though a buffoon, is a fighter of sorts and totally selfmade. Unfortunately he has no sense of political morality which is a double tragedy for a man who began his career as an American Baptist minister and later became Professor of Political Science at our university. Perhaps he has more responsibility than any other single individual except myself for the remarkable metamorphosis of His Excellency. But, perhaps like me he meant well, neither of us having been present before at the birth and grooming of a baby monster. As a bright pupil-teacher in lower primary school Reginald Okong had attracted the attention of American Baptist missionaries from Ohio who were engaged in belated but obdurate evangelism in his district. They saw a great future for him and ordained him at the age of 26. In their _Guinness Book of Records__ mentality they often called him the youngest native American Baptist minister in the world. Native American? Good heavens no! Native African. But, while they were conscientiously grooming Okong slowly but surely into the future head of their local church in say twenty or thirty years, the young Reverend, bright, ambitious and in a great hurry was working secretly on schemes of his own, one of which was to take him away altogether from the missionary vineyard to the secular campuses of a southern Black college in the United States of America itself to the dismay of his Ohio patrons who did not stop at accusations of ingratitude but mounted a determined campaign with US Immigration aimed at getting him deported. But he too was tough and overcame all his difficulties. Augmenting his slender resources by preaching and wrestling he graduated in record time by passing off his Grade Three Teachers' Certificate as the equivalent of two years of Junior College. Four years later he was back home with a Ph.D. in his bag, and went to teach at the university. I was editor of the _National Gazette__ at the time and he approached me with a proposal for a weekend current affairs column. I was mildly enthusiastic and although I was aware of the reservations some of his academic colleagues often expressed about his scholarship I proceeded to build him up as a leading African political scientist, as editors often do thinking they do it for the sake of their paper but actually end up fostering a freak baby. But I must say Okong was a perfect contributor in meeting deadlines and that kind of thing. And his column, 'String Along with Reggie Okong', soon became very popular indeed. No one pretended that he dispensed any spectacular insights, wisdom or originality but his ability to turn a phrase in a way to delight our ordinary readers was remarkable. He was full of clich, but then a clich is not a clich if you have never heard it before; and our ordinary reader clearly had not and so was ready to greet each one with the same ecstasy it must have produced when it was first coined. For Clich is but pauperized Ecstasy. Think of the very first time someone got up and said: 'We must not be lulled into a false sense of security.' He must have got his audience humming. It was like that with Okong; he was a smash hit! My friend, Ikem Osodi, was always at me for running that column. He said Professor Okong deserved to be hanged and quartered for phrasemongering and other counterfeit offences. But Ikem is a literary artist, and the _Gazette__ was not there to satisfy the likes of him; not even now that he sits in the editorial chair! A fact he is yet to learn. Naturally Okong never upset the politicians; he kept their constituency amused. I didn't mind, either. I had enough contributors like Ikem to do all the upsetting that was needed and a lot that wasn't. But on the very next day after the politicians were overthrown Okong metamorphosed into a brilliant analyst of their many excesses. I thought he had finally overreached himself changing his tune so abruptly; but not so my readers, judging by their ecstatic letters. Apparently he had scored another hit by describing the overthrow of the civilian regime as 'a historic fall from grace to grass!' After that I doffed my cap to him. And when His Excellency asked me to suggest half-adozen names for his Cabinet Professor Okong was top of my list. This calls for some explanation and justification. His Excellency came to power without any preparation for political leadership--a fact which he being a very intelligent person knew perfectly well and which, furthermore, should not have surprised anyone. Sandhurst after all did not set about training officers to take over Her Majesty's throne but rather in the high tradition of proud aloofness from politics and public affairs. Therefore when our civilian politicians finally got what they had coming to them and landed unloved and unmourned on the rubbish heap and the young Army Commander was invited by the even younger coup-makers to become His Excellency the Head of State he had pretty few ideas about what to do. And so, like an intelligent man, he called his friends together and said: 'What shall I do?' I had known him then for close on twenty-five years, from that day long ago when we first met as new boys of thirteen or fourteen at Lord Lugard College. And so I found myself advising 'a whole Head of State' who was, in addition, quite frankly terrified of his new job. This is something I have never been quite able to figure out: why the military armed to the teeth as they are can find unarmed civilians such a threat. For His Excellency, it was only a passing phase, though. He soon mastered his fear, although from time to time memories of it would seem to return to torment him. I can see no other explanation for his quite irrational and excessive fear of demonstrations, for example. Even pathetically peaceful, obsequious demonstrations. In his first days of power his constant nightmare was of the people falling into disaffection and erupting into ugly demonstrations all over the place, and he drove himself crazy worrying how to prevent it. I had no clear idea myself. But I imagined that a person like Professor Okong without having any clearer ideas than either of us would be helpful in putting whatever came into our heads into popular diction and currency. And so he was number one on my list and His Excellency appointed him Commissioner for Home Affairs. He had his day and then went into partial eclipse. But I hardly think he is due for prison, yet. TWO HIS EXCELLENCY'S deep anxiety had been swiftly assuaged by his young, brilliant and aggressive Director of the State Research Council (SRC). He proved once again in his Excellency's words as efficient as the Cabinet was incompetent. Every single action by this bright young man from the day of his appointment has given His Excellency good cause for self-congratulations for Major Johnson Ossai had been his own personal choice whom he had gone ahead to appoint in the face of strong opposition from more senior officers. And it had happened at the very tricky moment when His Excellency had decided to retire all military members of his cabinet and to replace them with civilians and, to cap it all, add President to all his titles. There were unconfirmed rumours of unrest, secret trials and executions in the barracks. But His Excellency rode the storm quite comfortably thanks to two key appointments he had personally made--the Army Chief of Staff and the Director of the State Research Council, the secret police. So when Professor Okong was marched in by the fierce orderly he found His Excellency in a tough and self-confident mood. 'Good day, Your Excellency, Mr. President,' intoned Professor Okong executing at the same time a ninety-degree bow. No reply nor any kind of recognition of his presence. His Excellency continued writing on his drafting pad for a full minute more before looking up. Then he spoke abruptly as though to an intruder he wanted to be rid of quickly. 'Yes, I want you to go over to the Reception quadrangle and receive the delegation waiting there ... Well, sit down!' 'Thank you, Your Excellency.' 'I suppose I ought to begin by filling you in on who they are and what they are doing here, etc. Unless, of course, by some miracle you made the discovery yourself after I left you.' 'No, sir. We didn't. I am sorry.' 'Very well, then. I shall tell you. But before I do I want to remind you of that little discussion we all had after the Entebbe Raid. You remember? You all said then: What a disgrace to Africa. Do you remember?' 'I remember, Your Excellency.' 'Very well. You were all full of indignation. Righteous indignation. But do you by any chance remember what I said? I said it could happen here. Right here.' 'You did, sir, I remember that very well.' 'You all said: Oh no, Your Excellency it can't happen here.' The way he said it in mimicry of some half-witted idiot with a speech impediment, might have raised a laugh from a bigger audience or at a less grave moment. 'Yes, Your Excellency, we said so,' admitted Professor Okong. 'We are truly sorry.' It wasn't yet very clear to him what point or connection was being made but what his answer should be was obvious and he repeated it: 'Your Excellency we are indeed sorry.' 'It doesn't matter. You know I've never really relied on you fellows for information on anything or anybody. You know that?' 'Yes, sir.' 'I should be a fool to. You see if Entebbe happens here it's _me__ the world will laugh at, isn't it?' Professor Okong found the answer to that one somewhat tricky and so made a vague indeterminate sound deep in his throat. 'Yes, it is _me__. General Big Mouth, they will say, and print my picture on the cover of _Time__ magazine with a big mouth and a small head. You understand? They won't talk about you, would they.' 'Certainly not, Sir.' 'No, because they don't know you. It's not your funeral but mine.' Professor Okong was uneasy about the word funeral and began a protest but His Excellency shut him up by raising his left hand. 'So I don't fool around. I take precautions. You und'stand?' 'Yes, sir. Once more, may I on behalf of my colleagues and myself give you--I mean Your Excellency--our undeserved--I mean unreserved--apology.' There was a long pause now like the silence of colleagues for a fallen comrade. His Excellency had been so moved that he needed the time to compose himself again. He took out a handkerchief and wiped his face and then his neck around the collar vigorously. Professor Okong stared on the tabletop with lowered eyes; like eyes at halfmast. 'The crowd that came in an hour or so ago,' he said calmly and sadly, 'has come from Abazon.' 'Those people again!' said Okong in a flare-up of indignation. 'The same people pestering you to visit them.' 'It is a peaceful and loyal and goodwill delegation ...' 'Oh I am so happy to hear that.' '... that has come all the way from Abazon to declare their loyalty.' 'Very good, sir. Very good! And I should say, about time too ...' A sudden violent frown on His Excellency's face silenced the Professor's re-awakened garrulity. 'But I have been made to understand that they also may have a petition about the drought in their region. They want personally to invite me to pay them a visit and see their problems. Well you know--everybody knows--my attitude to petitions and demonstrations and those kinds of things.' 'I do, sir. Every loyal citizen of this country knows your Excellency's attitude ...' 'Sheer signs of indiscipline. Allow any of it, from whatever quarter, and you are as good as sunk.' 'Exactly, Your Excellency.' 'This is a loyal delegation though, as I've just told you and they have come a long way. But discipline is discipline. If I should agree to see them, what is there to stop the truck-pushers of Gelegele Market marching up here tomorrow to see me. They are just as loyal. Or the very loyal market-women's organization trooping in to complain about the price of stockfish imported from Norway.' The Professor laughed loud but alone and stopped rather abruptly like a maniac. 'So I have a standing answer to all of them. No! _Kabisa__.' 'Excellent, Your Excellency.' It may have passed through Professor Okong's mind fleetingly that the man who was now reading him a lecture had not so long ago been politically almost _in statu pupillari__ to him. Or perhaps he no longer dared to remember. 'But we must remember that these are not your scheming intellectual types or a bunch of Labour Congress agitators but simple, honest-to-God peasants who, from all intelligence reports reaching me, sincerely regret their past actions and now want bygones to be bygones. So it would be unfair to go up to them and say: "You can go away now, His Excellency the President is too busy to see you. You get me?"' 'Quite clearly, Your Excellency.' Okong was beginning to get the hang of his summons here, and with it his confidence was returning. 'That's why I have sent for you. Find some nice words to say to them. Tell them we are tied up at this moment with very important matters of state. You know that kind of stuff ...' 'Exactly, Your Excellency. That's my line.' 'Tell them, if you like, that I am on the telephone with the President of United States of America or the Queen of England. Peasants are impressed by that kind of thing, you know.' 'Beauriful, Your Excellency, beauriful.' 'Humour them, is what I'm saying. Gauge the temperature and pitch your message accordingly.' 'I will, Your Excellency. Always at Your service.' 'Now if indeed they have brought a petition, accept it on my behalf and tell them they can rest assured that their complaints or rather problems--their problems, not complaints, will receive His Excellency's personal attention. Before you go, ask the Commissioner for Information to send a reporter across; and the Chief of Protocol to detail one of the State House photographers to take your picture shaking hands with the leader of the delegation. But for God's sake, Professor, I want you to look at the man you are shaking hands with instead of the camera ...' Professor Okong broke into another peal of laughter. 'I don't find it funny, people shaking hands like this ... while their neck is turned away at right angles, like that girl in _The Exorcist__, and grinning into the camera.' 'Your Excellency is not only our leader but also our Teacher. We are always ready to learn. We are like children washing only their bellies, as our elders say when they pray.' 'But whatever you do, make sure that nothing about petitions gets into the papers. I don't want to see any talk of complaints and petitions in the press. This is a goodwill visit pure and simple.' 'Exactly. A reconciliation overture from Your Excellency's erstwhile rebellious subjects.' 'No no no! I don't want to rub that in. Let's leave well alone.' 'But Your Excellency, you are too generous. Too generous by half! Why does every bad thing in this country start in Abazon Province? The Rebellion was there. They were the only ones whose Leaders of Thought failed to return a clear mandate to Your Excellency. I don't want to be seen as a tribalist but Mr. Ikem Osodi is causing all this trouble because he is a typical Abazonian. I am sorry to be personal, Your Excellency, but we must face facts. If you ask me, Your Excellency, God does not sleep. How do we know that that drought they are suffering over there may not be God's judgement for all the troubles they have caused in this country. And now they have the audacity to write Your Excellency to visit their Province and before you can even reply to their invitation they _carry their nonsense come your house.__ I think Your Excellency that you are being too generous. Too generous by half, I am sorry to say.' 'I appreciate your strong feeling, Professor, but I must do these things my way. Leave well alone.' 'As you please, Your Excellency. I shall do exactly as Your Excellency commands. To the last letter. I don't think Your Excellency has said anything about television coverage.' 'No no no no! I am glad you raised it. No television. Undue publicity. And before you know it everybody will be staging goodwill rallies all over the place so as to appear on television. You know what our people are. No television. Oh no!' 'Your Excellency is absolutely right. I never thought of that. It is surprising how Your Excellency thinks about everything.' 'You know why, Professor. Because it is my funeral, that's why. When it is your funeral you jolly well must think of everything. Especially with the calibre of Cabinet I have.' 'Your Excellency, may I seize this opportunity to formally apologize on my behalf and on behalf of my cabinet colleagues for our, shall I say, lack of vigilance. I say that in all humility and in the spirit of collective responsibility which makes each and every one of us guilty when one of us is guilty. One finger gets soiled with grease and spreads it to the other four ... Your Excellency may be aware that I have never wished to interfere in the portfolios of my cabinet colleagues. It is not because I am blind to all the hankypanky that is going on. It is because I have always believed in the old adage to paddle my own canoe. But today's incident has shown that a man must not swallow his cough because he fears to disturb others ...' 'I don't quite get you, Professor. Please cut out the proverbs, if you don't mind.' 'Well, Your Excellency, I have been debating within myself what my path of duty should be. Whether to alert you, I mean Your Excellency, on your relationship with the Honourable Commissioner for Information and also the Editor of the _Gazette__.' 'Relationship, how do you mean? Can't you speak more plainly?' The level of irritation in his voice was now pretty high. 'Well, Your Excellency, I am sorry to be personal. But I must be frank. I believe that if care is not taken those two friends of yours can be capable of fomenting disaffection which will make the Rebellion look like child's play. And if my sixth sense is anything to go by they may be causing a lot of havoc already.' 'That's fine, Mr. Okong. I deal with facts not gossip. Now run along and deal with that crowd and report back to me as soon as it's over. No rush though. After they've had their say and you have replied I want you to stay with them and act as host on my behalf. I have arranged for them to be entertained to drinks and small chop. You are to mingle with them and make them feel at home. They are not students of Political Science but I am sure you will manage. The State Research Council is in charge of the entertainment but you are the visible host. Is that clear? Make them feel they are here on my invitation.' 'Very well, Your Excellency.' Poor Professor Okong's last words were drowned by His Excellency's loud impatient buzzer and such was his confusion as he withdrew from the audience that he just narrowly escaped crashing full tilt against the heavy swing-door bringing in the orderly. Outside the door he stood for a while trying to regain full control of his legs which were suddenly heavy like limbs of mahogany. He felt he needed to find a chair somewhere and sit down for a while. But there was no chair in sight, only the vast expanse of grey-carpeted corridor. In any case he really had no time to stand and stare. He had an urgent national assignment to perform. He began to move again although three-quarters of his mind stayed on the crushing manner of his dismissal and particularly on the fact that His Excellency had called him mister. He stopped walking again. 'I am in disgrace,' he said aloud. 'God, I am in disgrace. What did I do wrong?' 'You still de here?' barked the orderly from behind him, and Professor Okong sprang into life once more. He felt somewhat light in the head. Perhaps the Chief of Protocol down the corridor would have some brandy in his cabinet. He could do with a shot. Meanwhile the hard-faced orderly who overtook him on the corridor a while ago had turned into the Council Chamber, dismissed the detained Cabinet on his Excellency's latest orders and summoned the Attorney-General to his presence. WHAT EXACTLY did the fellow mean, His Excellency wondered. I handled him pretty well, though. I certainly won't stand for my commissioners sneaking up to me with vague accusations against their colleagues. It's not cricket! No sense of loyalty, no _esprit de corps__, nothing! And he calls himself a university professor. No wonder they say he now heads a handclapping, spiritualist congregation on campus. Disgraceful. Soft to the core, that's what they all are. Professor! My semi-literate uncle was right all the way when he said that we asked the white man to pack and go but did not think he would take with him all the utensils he brought when he came. Professor! The white man put all that back in his box when he took his leave. But come to think of it whatever put it into our head when we arrived on this seat that we needed these half-baked professors to tell us anything. What do they know? Give me good military training and discipline any day! 'Come in, Attorney-General ... Sit down. I sent for you to ask you a direct, simple question. I realize that you are a lawyer but I am extremely busy and I want plain speaking and to the point. Right? I have received intelligence from various sources indicating that the Commissioner for Information is perhaps not as loyal to me as he might be. Now as you are well aware this is a very serious and very sensitive and very delicate matter and I am asking you in the strictest confidence. Nothing about this must get outside these four walls.' He indicated the four walls two at a time like an airline hostess pointing out exits in emergency drill before take-off. The Attorney-General nodded four or five times in quick succession. 'Fine. What would you make of such intelligence?' The Attorney-General was perched on the edge of his chair, his left elbow on the table, his neck craning forward to catch his Excellency's words which he had chosen to speak with unusual softness as if deliberately to put his hearer at a disadvantage; or on full alert on pain of missing a life and death password. As he watched his victim straining to catch the vital message he felt again that glow of quiet jubilation that had become a frequent companion especially when as now he was disposing with consummate ease of some of those troublesome people he had thought so formidable in his apprentice days in power. It takes a lion to tame a leopard, say our people. How right they are! As he savoured this wonderful sense of achievement gained in so short a time spreading over and soaking into the core of his thinking and his being like fresh-red tasty palm-oil melting and diffusing itself over piping hot roast yam he withdrew his voice still further into his throat and, for good measure, threw his head back on his huge, black, leather chair so that he seemed to address his words at the high, indifferent ceiling rather than the solicitous listener across the table. Suddenly suspicious like a quarry sniffing death in the air but uncertain in what quarter it might lurk the Attorney-General decided to stall. For a whole minute almost, he stood on one spot, making no move, offering no reply. 'Well?' His Excellency was stung into loudness by the other's delay and silence. He was also now sitting bolt upright. 'Did you hear what I said or should I repeat?' 'No need to repeat, Your Excellency. I heard you perfectly. You see, Your Excellency, your humble servant is a lawyer. My profession enjoins me to trust only hard evidence and to distrust personal feeling and mere suspicion.' 'Attorney-General, I sent for you not to read me a lecture but to answer my question. You may be the Attorney but don't forget I am the General.' The Attorney-General exploded into peals of laughter, uncontrollable and beerbellied. Through it he repeated again and again whenever he could: 'That's a good one, Your Excellency, that's a good one!' His Excellency, no doubt pleased with the dramatic result his wit had produced but not deigning to show it, merely fixed a pair of immobile but somewhat indulgent eyes on his Attorney-General, patiently waiting for his mirth to run its course. Finally it began to as he took the neatly-folded silk handkerchief out of his breast-pocket and dabbed his eyes daintily like a fat clown. 'You will now answer my question?' said His Excellency in a slightly amused tone. 'I am sorry, Your Excellency. Don't blame me; blame Your Excellency's inimitable sense of humour ... To speak the truth, Your Excellency, I have no evidence of disloyalty on the part of my honourable colleague.' He paused for effect. But nothing showed on His Excellency's face. 'But lawyers are also human. I have a personal feeling which may not stand up in court, I agree, but I hold it very strongly and if Chris were here I would say it to his face. I don't think Chris is one hundred percent behind you.' 'Why do you think you have that feeling?' 'Why do I have it? well let's put it this way. I have watched my colleague in question closely in the last year or so and my impression is that he does not show any joy, any enthusiasm in matters concerning this government in general and Your Excellency in particular. I was saying precisely that to him only a few minutes ago. Why do you go about with this tight face all the time, I said. Cheer up my friend. But he can't cheer up. Why? The reason is not far to seek. Two of you were after all class-mates at Lord Lugard College. He looks back to those days and sees you as the boy next door. He cannot understand how this same boy with whom he played all the boyish pranks, how he can today become this nation's Man of Destiny. You know, Your Excellency it was the same trouble Jesus had to face with his people. Those who knew him and knew his background were saying: "Is it not the same fellow who was born in a goat shed because his father had no money to pay for a chalet?" ...' He was going on and on, but His Excellency's mind was now divided between what he was saying and the echoes of old President Ngongo's advice: 'Your greatest risk is your boyhood friends, those who grew up with you in your village. Keep them at arm's length and you will live long.' The wise old tortoise! A new respect for his Attorney-General was now reflected on the mirror of his face where the shrewd lawyer saw and caught its beams in both hands. This giant iroko, he thought to himself, is not scaled every day, so I must get all the firewood it can yield me now while I am atop. 'As for those like me, Your Excellency, poor dullards who went to bush grammar schools, we know our place, we know those better than ourselves when we see them. We have no problem worshipping a man like you. Honestly I don't. You went to Lord Lugard College where half of your teachers were Englishmen. Do you know, the nearest white men I saw in my school were an Indian and two Pakistanis. Do you know, Your Excellency, that I was never taught by a real white man until I went to read law at Exeter in my old age as it were. I was thirty-one. You can't imagine, Your Excellency how bush people like me were. During my first year in Britain I saw Welsh Rarebit on the menu one fine day and I rubbed my hands together and my mouth began to water because I thought I was going to eat real bush-meat from the forests of Wales!' His Excellency was now definitely amused and smiling. The Attorney-General was dazzled by his own performance and success. Who would have believed His Excellency would listen this long to a man talking about himself and even smile at his jokes? 'I say this, Your Excellency, to show that a man of my background has no problem whatsoever worshipping a man like you. And in all fairness to my colleague-and I want to be scrupulously fair to him--he does have a problem; he wants to know why you and not him should be His Excellency. I don't mean he has said so in so many words to me but it is in his mind. I am not a mind reader but I am sure it is there, Your Excellency ...' 'Thank you. You have no evidence, only a rather interesting theory. I appreciate it. You know I don't as a rule go about snooping for this kind of information, or setting my commissioners to spy on each other. I can assure you there is a very special reason, reason of state, why I put that question to you. And I appreciate your candid answer. In a way I am relieved and very happy that there is no evidence whatsoever. Now, you must forget we ever talked about it. As I said before, not a word about this to any living soul, you und'stand?' 'Perfectly, Your Excellency. You can count on my absolute discretion.' 'Discretion? No, Mr. Attorney-General, you mean your absolute silence. If a word of this ever gets around, it's either from me or from you. Is that clear?' 'Absolutely, Your Excellency.' 'Good day.' THREE CHRIS CALLED IKEM on the telephone and asked him to send a photographer to the Reception Room of the Presidential Palace to cover a goodwill delegation from Abazon. 'That's a new one. A goodwill delegation from Abazon! A most likely story! What shall we hear next?' 'And for God's sake let me see the copy before it goes in.' 'And why, if one may have the temerity to put such a question to the Honourable Commissioner?' 'You've just said it. Because I am the Honourable Commissioner for Information. That's why.' 'Well that's not good enough, Mr. Commissioner for Information. Not good enough for _me__. You seem to be forgetting something, namely that it is _my__ name and address which is printed at the bottom of page sixteen of the _Gazette__ and not that of any fucking, excuse my language, any fucking Commissioner. It's me who'll be locked up by Major Samsonite if the need arises, not you. It's my funeral ...' 'Quite irrelevant, Ikem. You ought to know that. We have gone over this matter a million times now if we've gone over it once; and I'm getting quite sick and tired of repeating it. I am doing so now for the last time, the very last time. Chapter Fourteen section six of the Newspaper Amendment Decree gives the Honourable Commissioner general and specific powers over what is printed in the _Gazette__. You know that well. I will now invoke the letter of that law and send you my instruction in writing. Expect it in the next half-hour. It is clear that's how you want it, so I will oblige.' He hung up and called in his new secretary. As she pulled up her chair and turned to a clean page of her dictation pad the telephone came alive and she made to answer it. But the Commissioner got to it before her and placed his hand on it, and while it continued to ring he said to her: 'I am not in, no matter who it is.' Then he took his hand off and she picked up the receiver. It was Ikem and he was shouting. Chris could hear his strangled disembodied voice quite clearly because the secretary held the handset a little way from her ear to save her ear-drum. 'He is not on seat, sir.' 'Don't lie to me! He bloody well must be on seat because he just now hung up on me.' 'Well, sir, this is not the only telephone in the city, is it? He could have called you from his home or from the Presidential Palace or anywhere.' Chris was smiling a mirthless smile. An angry man is always a stupid man. Make a thorough fool of him, my dear girl, he thought. Ikem's concessionary silence was long and heavy. Then without another word he clanged the phone down so heavily that the girl jumped. 'Full marks, dear girl,' said Chris without a smile now. 'And my apologies for the behaviour of my graceless friends.' 'Who was it?' 'Didn't you know? That was the Editor of the _Gazette__.' Her flag of victory seemed all of a sudden to lose its wind. Her face fell; Chris noticed it, the look of awe. The sun in April is an enemy though the weatherman on television reciting mechanically the words of his foreign mentors tells you it will be fine all over the country. Fine! We have been slowly steamed into well-done mutton since February and all the oafs on our public payroll tell us we are doing just fine! No, my dear countrymen. This is Brigadier Misfortune of the Wilting 202 Brigade telling you you are _not__ fine. No my dear countrymen, you will not be fine until you can overthrow the wild Sun of April. Later tonight, fellow countrymen, you will hear the full text from General Mouth himself--I am only a mouthpiece--you will hear the words direct from him after the national anthem shall have been played backwards. Until then, beloved countrymen, roast in peace. The half kilometre to the Presidential Palace had already taken an hour and fifteen minutes in the closing-time heat and traffic, and he was not half-way there yet. The irresistible temptation of Abazon had brought him to this pass. As he inched forward and stopped and inched again and jammed his foot on the brakes he remembered: in heavy traffic the car to watch is the one ahead of the one behind you. Stupid cleverness, barren smartness that defeats ordinary, solid, sensible people. Like Elewa. She could never even begin to unravel that traffic conundrum. He looked far ahead just before the next big bend in the road and saw another welcome twitch of motion working its way down the line towards him. He awaited it eagerly but when it got to him he saw it amounted to no more than a miserable metre's progress. So he decided it was not worth the trouble of a gearshift. Save it up and add it to the next incremental move and you will have a nice ride of two metres. Besides, irritating the clutch unnecessarily can lead to ... The car behind him blared its horn so loud that he fairly jumped on his seat and out of his heat-haze reverie; he looked and saw through his rear-view mirror a man in great anger, his perspiring head thrust out of his yellow taxi-cab, gesticulating wildly to him to move on. Other cars and drivers were joining now in the blaring and shouting protest. He decided to ignore them all and protect the precious little space ahead of him, even if the heavens should fall! The noise increased tenfold now and began to infect some of the cars ahead which could not possibly know what the matter was but were quite gratuitously joining the horn-blowers behind. He stuck to his guns. Rather than yield he would occupy his mind by observing the surroundings ... The traffic going in the opposite direction on his left was luckier, as usual, than the one he found himself trapped in. But he gauged that even if, for the sake of moving at all, one should decide to turn around and join these people speeding away from one's destination the problem of space in which to turn would kill the proposition on the spot ... There was nothing else of much interest on that side so he turned to his right and saw for the first time a street decoration of old and dirty flags and bunting lining the route. Some Ministry of Information decorators must have been at work here today putting up these filthy rags saved up and stowed away in mouse-ridden cartons in a Ministry store after last year's May Day celebrations. It was at this point that he caught with the tail of his eye just in time the driver behind him manoeuvring his taxi out of the line; it was now virtually level with him, albeit on the grass kerb. He cranked his ignition which, mercifully, responded to the first attempt, shifted gear and moved forward to obliterate the prize space into which his antagonist had virtually wedged himself obliquely. From then on a war of nerves ensued between the two men whenever the forward traffic yielded an inch. In all known such encounters in the past between taxi and private drivers the taxi always won, its decisive weapon the certainty that the owner-driver will sooner concede his place than risk a dent on his smooth, precious carapace. But today, for the first time in the traffic history of this land, a taxi driver had met more than his match. This crazy owner-driver adversary failed altogether to live by the norms of his kind. One look at the condition of his car might have forewarned the other; but he either did not look or looked but failed to see. 'What shall I tell Mama-John?' a middle-aged civil servant was fabled to have wept when a taxi drew an ugly gash along the entire length of the shining side of his new Volvo. Well, Ikem had no wife to fear at home and no child called John, James or any other name. So the contest was more than equal. Grimly oblivious of the car beside him riding with its two legs in the bush, Ikem pursued the red brake-lights ahead like a randy he-goat sniffing the bottom of his mate. After fifteen minutes of dangerously close brushes the contender-driver conceded victory with a heavy curse, pulled back and returned again to second place behind the victor thanks to the cooperation of the bronze medallist who halted for him to resume his original position. Ikem heaved a very deep sigh and then, gallant in victory, pronounced it the work of the sun. We are parboiled as farmers do their rice to ease the shelling. Thereafter we take only five minutes to cook. That night he composed his Hymn to the Sun: Great Carrier of Sacrifice to the Almighty: Single Eye of God! Why have you brought this on us? What hideous abomination forbidden and forbidden and forbidden again seven times have we committed or else condoned, what error that no reparation can hope to erase? Look, our forlorn prayers, our offerings of conciliation lie scattered about your floor where you cast them disdainfully away; and every dawn you pile up your long basket of day with the tools and emblems of death. Wide-eyed, insomniac, you go out at cock-crow spitting malediction at a beaten, recumbent world. Your crimson torches fire the furnaces of heaven and the roaring holocaust of your vengeance fills the skies. Undying Eye of God! You will not relent, we know it, from compassion for us. Relent then for your own sake; for that bulging eye of madness that may be blinded by soaring motes of an incinerated world. Single Eye of God, will you put yourself out merely that men may stumble in your darkness. Remember: Single Eye, one-wallneighbour-to-Blindness, remember! What has man become to you, Eye of God, that you should hurt yourself on his account? Has he grown to such god-like stature in your sight? Homeward-bound from your great hunt, the carcass of an elephant on your great head, do you now dally on the way to pick up a grasshopper between your toes? Great Messenger of the Creator! Take care that the ashes of the world rising daily from this pyre may not prove enough when they descend again to silt up the canals of birth in the season of renewal. The birds that sang the morning in had melted away even before the last butterfly fell roasted to the ground. And when songbirds disappeared, morning herself went into the seclusion of a widow's penance in soot and ashes, her ornaments and fineries taken from her--velvets of soft elusive light and necklaces of pure sound lying coil upon coil down to her resplendent breasts: corals and blue chalcedonies, jaspers and agates veined like rainbows. So the songbirds left no void, no empty hour when they fled because the hour itself had died before them. Morning no longer existed. The trees had become hydra-headed bronze statues so ancient that only blunt residual features remained on their faces, like anthills surviving to tell the new grass of the savannah about last year's brush fires. Household animals were all dead. First the pigs fried in their own fat; and then the sheep and goats and cattle choked by their swollen tongues. Stray dogs in the marketplace in a running battle with vultures devoured the corpse of the madman they found at last coiled up one morning in the stall over which he had assumed unbroken tenancy and from where he had sallied forth every morning to mount the highest rung of the log steps at the centre of the square and taunt the absent villagers. Where is everybody? You have not forgotten your own market day? Come! Bring your long baskets of yams and your round baskets of cocoyams. Where are the fish women and the palm-oil women, where the high head-loads of pottery? Come, today may be your lucky day, the day you may find a blind man to trade against. You have nothing to sell? Who said so? Come! I will buy your mother's cunt. The dogs growled as they tore him apart and snapped at the vultures who struck back fearlessly with their beaks. After that last noisy meal the vultures pushed in their wicked, bashed-in heads and departed for another country. In the end even the clouds were subdued though they had held out longest. Their bedraggled bands rushed their last pathetic resources from place to place in a brave but confused effort to halt the monumental formations of the Sun's incendiary hosts. For this affront the Sun wreaked a terrible vengeance on them cremating their remains to their last plumes and scattering the ashes to the four winds. Except that the winds had themselves fled long ago. So the clouds' desecrated motes hung suspended in a mist across the whole face of the sky, and gave the Sun's light glancing off their back the merciless tint of bronze. Their dishonoured shades sometimes would stir in futile insurrection at the spirithour of noon starting a sudden furious whirling of ash and dust, only to be quickly subdued again. In last desperate acts the Earth would now ignite herself and send up a shield of billowing black smoke over her head. It was pitiful and misguided for the heat of the brush fires merely added to the fire of the Sun. And soon, anyhow, there was no fodder left to burn. No one could say why the Great Carrier of Sacrifice to the Almighty was doing this to the world, except that it had happened before, long, long ago in legend. The earth broke the hoes of the grave-diggers and bent the iron tip of their spears. Then the people knew the time had come to desert their land, abandoning their unburied dead and even the dying, and compounding thereby whatever abominations had first unleashed the catastrophe. They travelled by starlight and lay under the shade of their mats by day until the sands became too hot to lie upon. Even legend is reticent about their plight recounting only that every night when the journey began again many failed to rise from under their mats and that those who did stagger up cast furtive glances at the silent shelters and set their stony faces to the south. And by way of comment the voice of legend adds that a man who deserts his town and shrine-house, who turns his face resolutely away from a mat shelter in the wilderness where his mother lies and cannot rise again or his wife or child, must carry death in his eyes. Such was the man and such his remnant fellows who one night set upon the sleeping inhabitants of the tiny village of Ose and wiped them out and drank the brown water in their wells and took their land and renamed it Abazon. And now the times had come round again out of story-land. Perhaps not as bad as the first times, yet. But they could easily end worse. Why? Because today no one can rise and march south by starlight abandoning crippled kindred in the wild savannah and arrive stealthily at a tiny village and fall upon its inhabitants and slay them and take their land and say: I did it because death stared through my eye. So they send instead a deputation of elders to the government who hold the yam today, and hold the knife, to seek help of them. FOUR _Second Witness--Ikem Osodi__ 'LOOK HERE, ELEWA, I don't like people being difficult for no reason at all. I explained this whole thing to you from the very beginning. Didn't I?' 'You explain what? I beg you, no make me vex ... Imagine! Hmm! But woman done chop sand for dis world-o ... Imagine! But na we de causam; na we own fault. If I no kuku bring my stupid nyarsh come dump for your bedroom you for de kick me about like I be football? I no blame you. At all!' 'I don't know what you are talking about.' 'How you go know? You no fit know.' There is a car coming into the driveway and I go back to the window to see. No, it's only one of the people in the flats, but I stay at the window all the same and watch the car creep towards the common garage building on the right. One of the brake lights shows a naked white bulb in a broken red casing. So it was Mr. So Therefore, the notorious Posts and Telegraphs man in the next flat. He crawled through the third door. Perhaps he will beat his beautiful wife tonight; he hasn't done it now in months. Do you miss it then? Confess, you disgusting brute, that indeed you do! Well, why not? There is an extraordinary surrealistic quality about the whole thing that is almost satisfyingly cathartic. I start hearing it in my dream and then pass into a state of half-waking, and stay there for the rest of the act because he always chooses that hour when sleep is at its most seductive--the hour favoured also by the most discriminating armed robbers. And in the morning I find myself wondering how much of it had happened and how much I had dreamt up on my own. I ran into them once the very next morning on the short walk to the garage and they were so outrageously friendly and relaxed! She especially. I was dumbfounded. Later I hear how a concerned neighbour once called the police station-this was before I came to live here--and reported that a man was battering his wife and the Desk Sergeant asked sleepily: 'So Therefore?' So, behind his back, we call him Mr. 'So Therefore'. I can never remember his real name. Elewa is still equitably cursing her woman's lot and me. I shall say nothing more, just sit here on this window-sill and keep a look-out for the taxi which is taking much too long to appear. I wonder why. At this time of night you can generally get them to come within the hour. 'Imagine ... To put a girl for taxi at midnight to go and jam with arm robbers in the road.' 'You know very well, Elewa, that there are no more armed robbers in Bassa.' 'The woman dem massacre for motor Park last week na you killam.' 'Nobody will kill you, Elewa.' '_Nobody will kill you Elewa.__ Why you no drive me home yourself if say you know arm robbers done finish for Bassa. Make you go siddon.' 'I can't take you home because my battery is down. I have told you that twenty times already.' 'Your battery is down. Why your battery no down for afternoon when you come pick me.' 'Because you can manage a weak battery in the daytime but not at night, Elewa.' 'Take your mouth comot my name, ojare. Tomorrow make you take your nonsense battery come pick me again. Nonsense!' She is turning really aggressive. If I didn't know my Elewa I would be really worried. But she will call me first thing in the morning; perhaps during my nine o'clock editorial conference. The first time we parted in this kind of mood I was convinced I had lost her for good. That was the night I first tried to explain my reason for not letting her sleep in my flat. I should not have bothered with reasons at all if she hadn't kept saying I had another girl coming, that was why. 'Your compliment to my stamina notwithstanding,' I said totally and deliberately over her head, 'the reason is really quite simple. I no want make you join all the loose women for Bassa who no de sleep for house.' She stared at me with her mouth wide open, quite speechless. Thinking to press home my point and advantage I said something like: 'I wouldn't want a sister of mine to do that, you see.' She fired back then: 'Anoder time you wan' poke make you go call dat sister of yours, you hear?' When we parted I thought we were through. But next morning in the middle of my editorial conference my stenographer came in from the outer office and asked me to take a call. 'Who is that?' I asked angrily. 'A certain girl,' he said, in his stupid officialese. 'Tell her to call again whoever it is. Oh, never mind I'll take it. Excuse me gentlemen.' It was Elewa asking if I would take her to the beach in the afternoon to buy fresh fish from fishermen coming ashore before the 'thick madams' of the fish market had a chance to gobble up everything. 'I go cook you nice pepper soup, today,' she said. In the end the taxi does appear and I grab my torchlight and take her down our unswept and unlit stairs. Whenever I go up or down those stairs I remember the goat owned in common that dies of hunger. The driver opens the rear door from his seat. No interior light comes on. I flash my light where it ought to have been and see a few tangled wires. To reassure Elewa I make a show of studying the driver's face in the light of my torch. The driver protests: 'I beg make you no flash light for my eye. Wayting?' 'I want to be able to recognize you in the morning.' 'For sake of what?' 'For nothing. Just in case.' I move to the front of the car and flash the light at the registration number. 'Na him make I no de gree come for dis una bigman quarter. Na so so wahala.' 'Do you know it is an offence to operate a vehicle without interior lights according to the Criminal Code chapter forty-eight section sixteen subsection one hundred and six?' 'Na today--even na jus' now as I de come here de light quench out.' His lie is as good as mine but I have an advantage: I know he is lying; he doesn't know I am, and he is scared. 'OK. Tomorrow morning, first thing, make you go for mechanic fixam proper.' 'OK, oga.' 'I seal our mutual understanding with a twenty kobo tip and then turn to Elewa who has withdrawn totally into herself and the far corner of the back seat. 'You'll be alright, love.' 'Driver, kick moto make we de go, I beg you.' I will keep trying till I find a reason that clicks with her. I have never seen the sense in _sleeping__ with people. A man should wake up in his own bed. A woman likewise. Whatever they choose to do prior to sleeping is no reason to deny them that right. I simply detest the very notion of waking up and finding beside you somebody naked and unappetizing. It is unfair to you but especially to her. So I have never bargained with my right to repossess my apartment and my freedom fully. To shower and retire to my bed, alone is, it seems to me, such a simple, straightforward and reasonable expectation. But many women take it as a personal affront, which I find very odd indeed. They are their own worst enemy, women are. Elewa thinks it proves I don't love her well enough. It proves the exact opposite. I am extremely fond of the girl, more than anybody I can remember in years. And her lovemaking is just sensational. No gimmicks. I suppose I shall never discover where in that little body of hers she finds the power to lift you up bodily on her trunk while she is slowly curving upwards like a suspension bridge, her head and feet alone driven like steel piles into the riverbed. And then--mixed metaphors, unmixed blessings--shake you like a miner panning for gold! When we agree about sleeping separately we will have great times together. She is really a fine, fine girl. Who was it invented the hot shower? It's the kind of thing one ought to know and never does. We clutter up our brains with all kinds of useless knowledge and we don't know the genius who invented the shower or the paper stapler ... Let us now praise famous men and our fathers that begat us. Except that our fathers were not very famous in the invention line. But what does it matter? The French taught their little African piccaninnies to recite: _our forefathers, the Gauls__... It didn't stop Senghor from becoming a fine African poet ... A true descendant of the Mandingauls! I must get to work. That's the other thing about sleeping together. It prevents work. And if we are to improve on our fathers' performance in the invention business we must learn the sweet uses of hard work. I couldn't write tomorrow's editorials with Elewa's hands cradling my damp crotch. Chris keeps lecturing me on the futility of my crusading editorials. They achieve nothing. They antagonize everybody. They are essays in overkill. They're counterproductive. Poor Chris. By now he probably believes the crap too. Amazing what even one month in office can do to a man's mind. I think that one of these days I shall set him down in front of a blackboard and chalk up for him the many bull's-eyes of my crusading editorials. The line I have taken with him so far is perhaps too subtle: _But supposing my crusading editorials were indeed futile would I not be obliged to keep on writing them?__ To think that Chris no longer seems to understand such logic! Perhaps I have been too reluctant to face up to changes in my friends. Perhaps I should learn to deal with him along his own lines and jog his short memory with the many successes my militant editorials have had. Except, there is a big danger in doing it. Those who mismanage our affairs would silence our criticism by pretending they have facts not available to the rest of us. And I know it is fatal to engage them on their own ground. Our best weapon against them is not to marshal facts, of which they are truly managers, but passion. Passion is our hope and strength, a very present help in trouble. When I took over the _National Gazette__ from Chris I had no strong views one way or another about capital punishment. I even had no particular abhorrence about staging it publicly. If I had to vote I would probably vote against it by instinct but without much excitement. But all that was changed for me in the course of one afternoon. I became a passionate crusader. Chris said I was a romantic; that I had no solid contact with the ordinary people of Kangan; that the ordinary people of Kangan believed firmly in an eye for an eye and that from all accounts they enjoyed the spectacle that so turned my stomach. From all accounts! From one account, mine, Chris never went to the show. I did. And by God he is right about the enjoyment! But, thank God again, also totally wrong. By two o'clock there was no standing room on the beach, neither on the hot white sand nor the black granite boulders of the great breakwater wall stretching out to sea. On ordinary days only suicidal maniacs climbed those giant rocks that halted the galloping waves as the fierce horsemen at the durbar are stilled by an imaginary line before the royal pavilion. But this was no ordinary day. It was a day on which ordinarily sane people went berserk. The crowd on the perilous sea-wall had a fair sprinkling of women. And even children. The camera crew from the national Television perched on their mobile tower were much admired by the crowd. As they swivelled their machine from one side of the amphitheatre to another taking in all that colour in the brilliant sun--the yellow and red and white and blue--especially the blue--of Kangan indigo dyes, the people smiled and made faces and waved to the camera. The only room not taken yet was on the raised platform with numbered seats for VIPs and at the four stakes backed by their own little sea-wall of sandbags. The sun's heat honed with salt and vapour came down so brutally on the forehead that we all made visors with our hands to save our eyes. Those who had had the foresight to bring along umbrellas could not open them without obstructing others. A mild scuffle began right in front of me and ended only when the offending umbrella was folded up again. 'I beg una-o,' said its peace-loving owner, 'make I de use my thing for walkingstick.' 'E better so. No be for see umbrella we de roast for sun since we waka come here dis morning.' I began to wonder at one point if I hadn't made a foolish gesture in refusing the ticket for one of those nicely spaced-out, numbered seats, that now seemed so desirably cool. Hardly anybody was sitting on them yet. Isn't the great thing about a VIP that his share of good things is always there waiting for him in abundance even while he relaxes in the coolness of home, and the poor man is out there in the sun pushing and shoving and roasting for his miserable crumbs? Look at all those empty padded seats! How does the poor man retain his calm in the face of such provocation? From what bottomless wells of patience does he draw? His great good humour must explain it. This sense of humour turned sometimes against himself, must be what saves him from total dejection. He had learnt to squeeze every drop of enjoyment he can out of his stony luck. And the fool who oppresses him will make a particular point of that enjoyment: _You see, they are not in the least like ourselves. They don't need and can't use the luxuries that you and I must have. They have the animal capacity to endure the pain of, shall we say, domestication.__ The very words the white master had said in his time about the black race as a whole. Now we say them about the poor. But even the poor man can forget what his humour is about and become altogether too humorous in his suffering. That afternoon he was punished most dreadfully at the beach and he laughed to his pink gums and I listened painfully for the slightest clink of the concealed weapon in the voluminous folds of that laughter. And I didn't hear it. So Chris is right. But how I wish, for the sake of all the years I have known and loved him, that the day never came when he should be that kind of right. But that's by the way. I had never expected that Authority should excel in matters of taste. But the ritual obscenities it perpetrated that afternoon took me quite by surprise--from the pasting of a bull's eye on the chest of the victim to the antics of that sneaky wolf of a priest in sheep's clothing whispering God knows what blasphemies into the doomed man's ear, to the doctor with his stethoscope rushing with emergency strides to the broken, porous body and listening intently to the bull's eye and then nodding sagely and scientifically that all was finished. Call him tomorrow to minister to genuine human distress and see how slow he can be! And how expensive! Authority and its servants far exceeded my expectations that day on the beach. But it wasn't Authority that worried me really; it never does. It wasn't those officious footlings, either. It wasn't even the four who were mangled. It was the thousands who laughed so blatantly at their own humiliation and murder. As the four men were led out of the Black Maria the shout that went up was not like any sound I had ever heard or hoped to hear again. It was an ovation. But an ovation to whom for Christ's sake? The four men were as different as the four days in the sky. One had totally lost the power of his legs and was helped to the stakes between two policemen, his trouser front entirely wet. The second was crying pathetically and looking back over his shoulders all the time. Was it to avoid looking ahead to those hefty joists sunk into concrete or was there a deliverer who had given his word in a dream or vision to be there at the eleventh hour? The third had dry eyes and a steady walk. He was shouting something so loud and desperate that the nerves and vessels of his neck seemed ready to burst. Though he had just stepped out of a car he was sweating like a hand-truck pusher at Gelegele Market. The fourth was a prince among criminals. The police said he had eluded them for two years, had three murders to his name and a fourth pointed in his direction. He wore a spotless white lace _danshiki__ embroidered with gold thread, and natty blue terylene trousers. His appearance, his erect, disdainful walk hurled defiance at the vast mockery and abuse of the crowd and incensed it to greater vehemence. He saved his breath for the psychological moment when the crowd's delirious yelling was suddenly stilled by its desire to catch the command of the officer to the firing squad. In that brief silence, in a loud and steady voice he proclaimed: 'I shall be born again!' Twice he said it, or if thrice, the third was lost in a new explosion of jeers and lewd jokes and laughter so loud that it was clearly in compensation for the terrible truth of that silence in which we had stood cowed as though heaven had thundered: Be still and know that I am God. The lady in front of me said: 'Na goat go born you nex time, noto woman. My tenuous links with that crowd seemed to snap totally at that point. I knew then that if its own mother was at that moment held up by her legs and torn down the middle like a piece of old rag that crowd would have yelled with eye-watering laughter. I still ask myself how anyone could laugh at the proclamation of such a terrible curse or fail to be menaced by the prospect of its fulfilment. For it was clear to me that the robber's words spoken with such power of calmness into the multitude's hysteria just minutes before his white lace reddened with blood and his hooded head withered instantly and drooped to his chest were greater than he, were indeed words of prophecy. If the vision vouchsafed to his last moments was to be faulted in any particular it would be this: that it placed his reincarnation in the future when it was already a clearly accomplished fact. Was he not standing right then, full grown, in other stolen lace and terylene, in every corner of that disoriented crowd? And he and all his innumerable doubles, were they not mere emulators of others who daily stole more from us than mere lace and terylene? Leaders who openly looted our treasury, whose effrontery soiled our national soul. The only happy memory of that afternoon was the lady in front of me who vomited copiously on the back of the man with the umbrella and had to clean the mess with her damask headtie. I like to believe that there were others like her in every section of that crowd, picking up their filthy mess with their rich cloths. Certainly there were many who fainted although my news reporters put it all to the blazing sun. They also reported, by the way, a very busy day for pick-pockets, minor reincarnations of the princely robber. The next day I wrote my first crusading editorial calling on the President to promulgate forthwith a decree abrogating the law that permitted that outrageous and revolting performance. I wrote the editorial with so much passion that I found myself ending it with a one verse hymn to be sung to the tune 'Lord Thy Word Abideth.' The worst threat from men of hell May not be their actions cruel Far worse that we learn their way And behave more fierce than they. A bad hymn, as most hymns tend to be. But people sang it up and down the street of Bassa. Chris was critical of my tone and of my tactlessness in appearing to command His Excellency. But when the said Excellency proceeded to do exactly what I had demanded Chris had to come up with a new tune. My editorial suddenly had nothing whatever to do with the new decree. His Excellency had quite independently come to the conclusion that he could earn a few credits by reversing all the unpopular acts of the civilian regime. And the Public Executions Amendment Decree was only one of them. And this was the same Chris who had just rebuked me for not knowing that public executions were such a popular sport. In the one year or more since those particular events I have successfully resisted Chris's notion of editorial restraint. But for how much longer? 'I CALLED YOUR OFFICE three or four times,' he says as soon as I enter. He is not looking at me but at the sheaf of typed papers he is bouncing up and down on the table between his palms to line them up. 'I take it you are asking me to explain why I was not on seat.' 'Oh don't be silly, Ikem. I'm only telling you ...' 'Well, sir. I had to go to GTC to hire a battery and have them place mine on twenty-four hour charge. I am sorry about that.' 'I was calling you about this morning's editorial.' He is still not looking at me but the irritation on his face and in his voice is clearly mounting despite the quietness. I don't seem to be able to arouse anger in him these days; only irritation. 'What about it?' 'What about it! You know, Ikem I have given up trying to understand what you are up to. Really, I have.' 'Good! At last!' 'How can you go about creating stupid problems for yourself and for everybody else.' 'Come on now! Speak for yourself, Chris. I am quite able to take care of myself. As for my editorials, as long as I remain editor of the _Gazette__ I shall not seek anybody's permission for what I write. I've told you that many times before. If you don't like it you know what to do, Chris, don't you? You hired me, didn't you?' 'Firing could be the least of your problems just now let me tell you. You had better have some pretty good explanations ready for H.E. The only reason I called you is that he is likely to ask me first and I want to tell you now that I am sick and tired of getting up every Thursday to defend you.' 'Defend me? Good heavens! Who ever asked you to defend me? From what, anyway. Sounds to me like busy work, Chris.' 'Well, never mind. I shan't do it any more. From now on you can go right ahead and stew in your own water.' 'Thank you, sir. If there is nothing else, may I leave now?' 'You certainly may!' 'That was short and sweet,' says his little painted doll of a secretary in the outer office. At a loss I simply glare at her and then slam her door after me. But a few steps down the corridor what I should have said comes, too late, to me. Something like: I've heard that you like it long and painful. I stopped; weighed it; changed my mind and continued walking. That young lady has a reputation for never putting Chris on the telephone until the secretary at the other end has put on the boss. Apparently she considers it a serious breach of protocol for the Honourable Commissioner to say hello to an assistant. I wonder why everything in this country turns so readily to routines of ritual contest. The heavyweight champion must not show his face but wait in his locker until the challenger has cooled his heels in the ring. I must say the whole charade is so unlike Chris that it must be done without his knowledge. But when will he learn that power is like marrying across the Niger; you soon find yourself paddling by night. IT SEEMS CHRIS has tortured himself for nothing. A week has gone by and no despatch-rider has delivered a query to me in the loud type-face of palace Remingtons. No green army jeep or blue police jeep has pulled up outside the _Gazette__ or in front of the flats. Chris is totally shamefaced. Naturally. Who can blame him? I'll have to go over to his place this evening and see if I can make him feel better. Worshipping a dictator is such a pain in the ass. It wouldn't be so bad if it was merely a matter of dancing upside down on your head. With practice anyone could learn to do that. The real problem is having no way of knowing from one day to another, from one minute to the next, just what is up and what is down. It seems that when Chris was last at the palace the Big Shot had said quite categorically that he would pay a visit to Abazon. Chris came away and began dutifully to relay the news to everyone including myself. But in the meantime the Big Shot has had a brief snooze and on waking up has begun to see the world differently. 'I must not go and visit my loyal subjects of Abazon,' he now says. And all plans are immediately cancelled. Which is fine, except that nobody remembers to tell the Honourable Commissioner who has charge for disseminating such vital information throughout the four provinces of the empire. So poor Chris is left totally in the lurch. Nobody told _me__ either. But the great difference between me and Chris is that I never did expect to be told. I happened to feel a certain way in the matter and like a free agent, sat up at night after Elewa had gone away in the taxi and composed my thoughts. I keep telling Chris that life is simpler that way. Much simpler. Stop looking back over your shoulder, I tell him. There ain't no deliverer running just a little behind schedule. March to the stake like a man and take the bullet in your chest. Much simpler. But the real irony of the situation is that my own method is more successful even on Chris's own terms. How many times now have I managed to read the Big Shot's mind better than all the courtiers? Who knows, I may soon be suspected of witchcraft or of having a secret hot-line to the palace! For it does not stand to reason that from my hermit's hut in the forest I should divine the thoughts of the Emperor better than the mesmerized toadies in daily attendance. But it is quite simple really. The Emperor may be a fool but he isn't a monster. Not yet, anyhow; although he will certainly become one by the time Chris and company have done with him. But right now he is still OK, thank God. That's why I believe that basically he does want to do the right thing. Some of my friends don't agree with me on this, I know. Even Chris doesn't. But I am sure I am right; I am sure that Sam can still be saved if we put our minds to it. His problem is that with so many petty interests salaaming around him all day, like that shyster of an AttorneyGeneral, he has no chance of knowing what is right. And that's what Chris and I ought to be doing--letting him glimpse a little light now and again through chinks in his solid wall of court jesters; we who have known him longer than the rest should not be competing with them. I have shown what light I can with a number of controversial editorials. With Chris I could do much more. If Sam were stronger or brighter he probably wouldn't need our offices; but then he probably wouldn't have become His Excellency in the first place. Only half-wits can stumble into such enormities. Chris has a very good theory, I think, on the military vocation. According to this theory military life attracts two different kinds of men: the truly strong who are very rare, and the rest who would be strong. The first group make magnificent soldiers and remain good people hardly ever showing let alone flaunting their strength. The rest are there for the swank. The truth of this came to me on two separate occasions afterwards, both of them interestingly enough at the Gelegele Market. A tottering pugnacious drunkard was provoking a fight with a towering stranger carrying a small portmanteau and obviously on his way to the Motor Park. I think the drunk was claiming the box or even the man's clothes as his own. Everyone in the market, it seemed, knew the drunk because many of the witnesses to the scene gave the same advice to the strong man with the box. 'If you don't handle that fool quite firmly, my friend, he will pester you to death,' they said. But the stranger appeared more eager to slip past his tormentor than follow the crowd's advice. Which annoyed many of the people in the end. They didn't see why anybody should let a drunken idiot walk all over him in this outrageous way unless there was something indeed wrong with him. Perhaps he didn't own the clothes he wore. At that point a newcomer into the watching crowd recognized the stranger as last night's new champion wrestler of Kangan. 'No wonder,' said someone in a simple matter-of-fact voice and the rest of the people seemed to understand too. I was really amazed at their perceptiveness. The other incident was at the Motor Park itself. I was sitting in my car reading and waiting for a friend who was having her hair plaited down at the hairdressers' shed. All around the parked cars young sellers of second-hand clothes displayed their articles on wooden clothes-horses. From time to time there would be a sharp stampede at some secret signal for the approach of a policeman or the Market Master, for none of these boisterous hawkers apparently had any right whatsoever to display their goods at that section of the market reserved for cars. It took no more than one second of unbelievable motion and all those hundreds of wooden frames bedecked with the heavy castoffs of distant affluent and consumer cultures of cold climates would simply melt away in the bright noonday sun. Usually the alarm would prove to be false and they would reappear as promptly and miraculously as they had vanished, with much laughter and joking, and take up their illegal positions again. I never pass up a chance of just sitting in my car, reading or pretending to read, surrounded by the vitality and thrill of these dramatic people. Of course the whole of Gelegele Market is one thousand live theatres going at once. The hair-plaiting shed, for example, where Joy was now having her hair done, seated on a mat on the floor her head held between the knees of the artist into whose nimble hand she fed lengths of black thread, did not lack its own entertainment. But I would pick my vivacious youngsters of the used clothes, any day. It was a great shock to me then when that army car drove up furiously, went into reverse before it had had time to stop going forward and backed at high speed into a young man and his clothes who just barely managed to scramble out of the car's vicious path. A cry went up all round. The driver climbed out, pressed down the lock button and slammed the door. The young trader found his voice then and asked, timidly: 'Oga, you want kill me?' 'If I kill you I kill dog,' said the soldier with a vehemence I found totally astounding. Quite mechanically I opened my door and came out. I believe I was about to tell the fellow that there was no need for him to have said that. But I am glad I didn't in the end, because there are things which an observer can only see if he resists the temptation to jump into the fray and become an actor himself. So I watched the ass walk away with the exaggerated swagger of the coward, and went back into my car. But I was truly seething with anger. My young friends were stunned into total silence. But then the one who had had the brush with the car suddenly laughed and asked: 'Does he mean that after killing me he will go and kill a dog?' And the others joined in the laughter. 'No, he means that to kill you is like to kill a dog.' 'So therefore you na dog ... Na dog born you.' But the victim stuck to his far more imaginative interpretation. 'No,' he said again. 'If I kill you I kill dog means that after he kill me he will go home and kill his dog.' Within ten minutes the life of the group was so well restored by this new makebelieve that when the offensive soldier returned to his car to drive away his victim of half an hour ago said to him: 'Go well, oga.' To which he said nothing though it diminished him further still, if such a thing could be conceived. And then I was truly glad that I had not interfered with that impeccable scenario. TO SAY THAT SAM was never very bright is not to suggest that he was a dunce at any time in the past or that he is one now. His major flaw was that all he ever wanted was to do what was expected of him especially by the English whom he admired sometimes to the point of foolishness. When our headmaster, John Williams, told him that the Army was the career for gentlemen he immediately abandoned thoughts of becoming a doctor and became a soldier. I am sure the only reason he didn't marry the English girl MM found for him in Surrey was the shattering example of Chris and his American wife Louise whom he married, if you please, not in New York which might have made a certain sense but in London. I suppose it is not impossible for two strangers to fabricate an affinity of sorts from being exiled to the same desert island even from opposite ends of the earth. Unfortunately Chris and Louise didn't make it once in bed, or anywhere else, throughout their six months cohabitation. John Williams, our teacher, whose favourite phrase was 'good and proper, pressed down and flowing over,' in describing punishment, probably made the best choice for Sam after all. He grew so naturally into the part, more easily, I think, than he would have slipped into the role of doctor although I am sure his bedside manner would have been impeccable. But after Sandhurst he was a catalogue model of an officer. _His__ favourite expression after he came home was: _it's not done__, spoken in his perfect accent. I went to see Sam the morning after I heard news of his promotion to Captain. It was Sunday and the time about ten o'clock. I found him in his morning coat lounging in a sofa with Sunday papers scattered around him on the floor, a half-smoked pipe on a sidetable and from his hi-fi Mozart's _Eine Kleine Nachtmusik__ on a 45 r.p.m. record playing at 33 1/3. That was Sam's problem. Not very bright but not wicked. And completely tone-deaf. Nothing is more entertaining than Sam trying to whistle a tune. There is something else about Sam which makes him enormously easy to take: his sense of theatre. He is basically an actor and half of the things we are inclined to hold against him are no more than scenes from his repertory to which he may have no sense of moral commitment whatsoever. He was fascinated by the customs of the English, especially their well-to-do classes and enjoyed playing at their foibles. When he told me about his elegant pipe which he had spent a whole morning choosing in a Mayfair shop I could see that he was not taking himself seriously at all. And therefore I had no reason to do so. Of course one may well question the appropriateness of these attitudes in a Head of State. But quite frankly, I am not troubled by that. In fact the sort of intellectual playfulness displayed by Sam must be less dangerous than the joyless passion for power of many African tyrants. As long as he gets good advice and does not fall too deeply under the influence of such Rasputins as Reginald Okong we may yet avoid the very worst. Perhaps I am altogether too sanguine but his response to the doctors' crisis gave me great hope and encouragement. He saw right away--just as I did and Chris refused to-that it wasn't Mad Medico's insane graffiti that brought all those worthy people so viciously about his throat. Far from it. His crime was rather that he had dared to get one of their number disgraced. Publicly they admitted that Dr Ofe may have behaved unethically. But did that give a layman, especially one who was also a foreigner, the right to instigate relatives of a dead patient and even give them his own money to sue the very hospital in which he works? Their answer to their own rhetorical question was, of course, an emphatic no. Mine was an equally strong yes and so, thank God, was His Excellency's. In fairness to Chris he did not disagree with us on the Ofe affair but took the legalistic line that the Doctors' complaint about Mad Medico's notices must be seen in isolation and entirely on its own merit. That shyster of an Attorney-General must have given free lessons to Chris. Admittedly Mad Medico made a complete fool of himself putting up those atrocious jokes. He was both irresponsible in his action and careless of his safety. After his brush with the doctors he should have known that he had made enemies who would deploy themselves in various ambushes for his head. He obliged them far beyond the call of duty by offering it on a platter of gold. When I launched my editorial crusade on his behalf I had no reason to belittle his gross abuse of good taste. But I had to place beside it the image of that wretched man lying in unspeakable agony for four days and nights in the surgical ward while his distracted relations ran from hospital to a distant village and back again trying in vain to raise the twenty-five manilla that Dr Ofe must have before he would operate. All witnesses spoke of the man's screams which filled the Men's Ward and could be heard as far away as the Emergency Room at the Hospital Gate. They spoke of the nurses unable to shut him up and leaving the ward for hours on end to get a little peace somewhere else. Three nurses spoke of their efforts to call Dr Ofe on the telephone and his threats of disciplinary action against them if they continued disturbing him at home and of his instructions to give the man yet another shot of morphia. And the doctor who finally performed the operation after Mad Medico began to interfere in the matter spoke at the inquiry of all those lengths of black intestine, four feet or perhaps eight, I don't now recall, which he had to take out and how everything was already much too late. That was the story I had to place beside Mad Medico's folly in deciding whether I should sit back and let him be hounded out of the country. It seemed to me perfectly clear that whatever foolishness Mad Medico should get into now it would be morally intolerable to allow Dr Ofe's friends to triumph however vicariously over him. Fortunately His Excellency saw it my way too. Chris says I am sentimental. Well, let me be. Perhaps I am so indulgent about Sam's imitation of the English because I believe that a budding dictator might choose models far worse than the English gentleman of leisure. It does not seem to me that the English can do much harm to anybody today. After a long career of subduing savages in distant lands they discovered the most dangerous savage of all just across the English Channel and took him on and brought him to heel. But the effort proved too great and the cost too high, and although they acquitted themselves with honour they made sure that they would not be called upon to do it again. And so they anointed the hero of their dazzling feat the greatest Englishman who ever lived, dumped him at the polls and voted Clement Attlee in. Whatever fear the ghost of British imperial vocation may still hold over the world's little people was finally removed when a renegade Englishman and his little band of thugs seized Her Majesty's colony in Rhodesia and held it for thirteen years. No, the English have, for all practical purposes, ceased to menace the world. The real danger today is from that fat, adolescent and delinquent millionaire, America, and from all those virulent, misshapen freaks like Amin and Bokassa sired on Africa by Europe. Particularly those ones. I think that much of the change which has come over Sam started after his first OAU meeting. Chris and I and a few other friends called at the Palace to see him as we used to do quite often in those days. I noticed right away that it was not the same Sam who had left Bassa only a week before. Everybody remarked on the change later--Chris, Mad Medico and the others. He spoke like an excited schoolboy about his heroes; about the old emperor who never smiled nor changed his expression no matter what was going on around him. 'Perhaps he doesn't hear very well,' said Mad Medico. 'Nonsense,' said His Excellency. 'His hearing is perfect. I had breakfast with him on the fifth morning. He heard everything I said and has the most lively mind and the most absolutely delightful sense of humour.' 'So he wears his mask-face only for the gathering-in of the tribes,' I said. 'I wish I could look like him,' said His Excellency wistfully, his thoughts obviously far away. If somebody else had reported that exchange to me, especially the sentence _I wish I could look like him__ I would not have believed it. A young man wishing he could look like an octogenarian! But the leader Sam spoke most about was President Ngongo--I beg your pardon-President-for-Life Ngongo, who called Sam his dear boy and invited him over to his suite for cocktails on the second day. I have little doubt that Sam learnt the habit of saying _Kabisa__ from old Ngongo. Within a week it spread to members of the Cabinet and down to the Bassa cocktail set. From there it made its way more or less rapidly into the general community. The other day the office driver who drove me to GTC said: 'Charging battery na pure waste of money; once battery begin de give trouble you suppose to buy new one. _Kabisa__.' It is unlikely that Sam came away with nothing but _Kabisa__ in his travelling bag. I may be wrong but I felt that our welcome at the palace became distinctly cooler from that time. The end of the socializing is not important in itself but its timing must be. I set it down to Sam's seeing for the first time the possibilities for his drama in the role of an African Head of State and deciding that he must withdraw into seclusion to prepare his own face and perfect his act. FIVE 'SAME HERE,' says Ikem. 'Shit!' replies Mad Medico. 'You don't have to follow your fucking leader in this house, you know. Come on, have Scotch or Campari or anything--even water--just to show him.' 'Too late,' says Ikem. 'We were enslaved originally by Gordon's Dry Gin. All gestures of resistance are now too late and too empty. Gin it shall be forever and ever, Amen.' Jovial words, but there is not the slightest sign of gaiety in the voice or face. 'I wonder where you got the idea that Ikem follows my lead. Once again, you are the last to know. He'd sooner be found dead. I thought everyone, even you, knew that.' 'Following a leader who follows his leader would be quite a circus,' said Ikem with unabated grimness. Mad Medico pours out two long gins made longer still by ice cubes he has transferred with his fingers from a plastic bowl. He pours a little tonic water into each and I ask him to add more to mine. Then he throws into each glass a slip of lemon from another bowl giving it a little squeeze between thumb and forefinger before letting it drop, and stirs. Twice or thrice in the preparation he has licked his fingers or wiped them on the seat of his blue shorts. I can see that Ikem's new girl, Elewa, is at first horrified and then fascinated. She is seeing Mad Medico at close quarters for the first time though she has obviously heard much about him. Everyone has. Perhaps she is seeing any white man at close quarters for the first time, for that matter. Mad Medico's proper name is John Kent but nobody here calls him by that any more. He enjoys his bizarre title; his familiar friends always abbreviate it to MM. He is of course neither a doctor nor quite exactly mad. Ikem once described him as an aborted poet which I think is as close as anyone has got to explaining the phenomenon that is John Kent. And the two of them, poet and aborted poet, get on very well together. MM got on very well too with His Excellency, as everybody knows. It was their friendship which brought him here in the first place, made him hospital administrator and saved him a year ago from sudden deportation. Elewa's fascination grows as she explores with wide amazed eyes Mad Medico's strange home. I find her freshness quite appealing. Now she nudges Beatrice and points at the legend inscribed in the central wall of the bar above the array of bottles in a semiliterate hand and Beatrice obligingly chuckles with her although she has seen it at least a dozen times. Mad Medico notices the young lady's fascination and explains that he owes the inspiration for that poem to his steward, Sunday. ALL DE BEER DEM DRINK FOR HERE DE MAKE ME FEAR If indeed the inspiration was Sunday's it only goes to prove that birds of the same feather flock together. For Mad Medico has a strange mania for graffiti which was the cause of all the _wahalla__ that would have cost him his job and residence in the country about a year ago had his Excellency and Ikem not gone to his rescue, their one and only joint effort to date. The doctors were ready to cut him up alive and I still can't say that I blame them entirely. Ikem insists that some of them used the occasion to unload themselves of other grievances but I still think the inscriptions were inexcusable and in deplorable taste. _Blessed are the poor in heart for they shall see God__ cannot anywhere in the world pass as a suitable joke to be nailed up in the ward for heart patients, never mind that one stupid defender of MM's said the patients were either too ill or too illiterate and so no one could have been hurt! The thing was in abominable taste. His other inscription outside the men's venereal diseases ward: a huge arrow sitting between two tangential balls and pointing like a crazy road sign towards the entrance and the words TO THE TWIN CITIES OF SODOM AND GONORRHEA was, if such a thing could be conceived, worse. 'How is my wonder boy?' asks MM. 'I never get a chance to see him these days. I suppose rescuing a bungling old fool from deportation must take its toll on the hardiest of friendships. Oh well. How's he?' 'He is flourishing,' I said. 'Last Friday afternoon he placed the entire cabinet on one hour's detention.' 'He did? How boring,' said Mad Medico. 'You know something, Dick, the most awful thing about power is not that it corrupts absolutely but that it makes people so utterly boring, so predictable and ... just plain uninteresting.' He spoke more to his guest from England than to us. 'I told you this boy was such a charmer when I first met him. I'd never seen anyone so human, so cultured.' Dick nods disinterestedly. He has scarcely said a dozen words all afternoon. He drinks gin and lime as though it were Alka Seltzer. But in contrast to his dark mood his complexion is bright, almost girlish, unlike Mad Medico's excessively coarse tan. It was Mad Medico himself who first drew our attention to this when he introduced Dick to us. 'A white man in the tropics', he had said, 'needs occasionally to see someone fresh from his tribe to remind him that his colour is perhaps not as wrong, and patchy as it may seem.' Dick is now speaking in his lugubrious way. He is sitting on the far end of the three-sided bar across from me. Ikem and the two girls are between us on the forward and longer section of the counter facing Mad Medico, our bartender in the pit. Dick is saying that Acton's corruption was probably intended to encompass dehumourization if such a word exists. 'It doesn't but certainly should,' says Mad Medico offhandedly. 'What did you do?' he asks me. 'What?' 'You said you were all detained.' 'Oh, that. No, we didn't do anything. That was the trouble. A delegation arrived at the Presidential Palace from Abazon--you know the drought place--and none of us knew they were coming. Naughty, isn't it? So His Excellency gets mad at us.' 'That's beautiful,' says Mad Medico, and then turning to Dick he plays the knowing Old Coaster to a ruddy newcomer: 'Abazon is in the north-west and has had no rain for a year. So the poor devils up there send a delegation to ask His Excellency to give them rain.' He then turns to me for confirmation. 'That's about the size of it?' 'More or less,' replies Ikem before I can say anything. 'That's marvellous,' says Dick brightening up. 'A kind of native Henderson. Absolutely fascinating. And what did he do?' 'He locks these fellows up--not the delegation, mind you, but his own cabinet ... That must have been the original meaning of cabinet. People you put away in a wooden locker, ha ha ha! You had such a winner and you didn't put it in your rag the very next morning, Ikem. I'm surprised at you.' 'NTBB' replies Ikem. 'Not To Be Broadcast,' he adds dispelling the puzzlement in a few faces. The girls and Mad Medico laugh. Dick still looks puzzled. 'I don't see the connection,' he says. 'Between what?' 'The delegation from this desert place and the cabinet.' I am going to explain again but Mad Medico has a better explanation and drowns me out. 'That's a Britisher for you, Chris. He is looking for connections. There aren't any, young man. This is negritude country, not Devonshire.' 'Oh, I wouldn't go quite that far,' I say. 'We are no more illogical in these parts than any other people, yourselves included.' There is perhaps more shrillness in my voice than is required. 'Come! Come!' says Dick in a most offensively patronizing tone. 'John is only joking.' 'You see what I mean,' says Mad Medico before I can claim to be joking too. 'No sense of humour left. None whatsoever. They are all so stiff and damned patriotic, so quick to take offence. You can't make a joke here if you are white. You should have heard the names they called me because I was so naive as to try to cheer up some dreary wards in their blasted hospital. Imperialist! White racist! Red Neck! The best though was Negrophobist. Do you know that one? I didn't. Negrophobist. Apparently the opposite of nigger-lover.' 'Let's face it, MM,' (I am now really irritated) 'would you have put up those jokes of yours in an English hospital?' 'Of course I wouldn't. Never said I would. But the English are not supposed to have a sense of humour to begin with. And this is not England, is it? Look outside. What do you see? Sunshine! Life! Vitality. It says to you: Come out and play. Make love! Live! And these dusky imitators of _petit bourgeois__ Europe corrupted at Sandhurst and London School of Economics expect me to come here and walk about in a bowler hat and rolled umbrella like a fucking banker on Cheapside. Christ!' We all laugh and applaud the brief oration. Except Dick. He is watching intently as Mad Medico perspiring refreshes his glass with campari and soda, drops in two ice cubes and licks his fingers. Dick, it turns out, is the founding editor of a new poetry magazine in Soho called _Reject__. Prompted by Mad Medico he tells the story, at first reluctantly and in instalments of one sentence or two a piece. 'How did it begin? I am sure Ikem will be interested to hear.' 'Oh, simply by placing advertisements in well-known literary journals calling for manuscripts rejected by other poetry magazines. Simple.' 'That was three years ago?' 'Well, almost four.' 'And it caught on?' 'Our success was immediate and total.' From now something like animation begins to enter his voice. The expression on his face changes too. At first it looks like a sneer but is presumably his own way of pride. He is now more open-handed with information. 'In under two years we exploded the pretensions of the poetry establishment and their stuffy party organs. It was the most significant development in British poetry since the war.' The group gradually splits in two: Ikem and the editor at one end of the bar with Elewa sticking to them, understanding little; and Mad Medico joining Beatrice and me. 'I am sorry to tell you this,' MM says to Beatrice, 'but you waited five years too late to meet Chris. He and Sam were much nicer people then.' 'Who wasn't? But five years ago BB was below the legal age and would have been of limited interest to me.' 'I beg your pardon,' she says. 'Really, they were such fun then, he and Sam,' says MM almost to himself. He stirs the tiny iceberg floating in his Scotch with his index finger. A touch of genuine wistfulness has come into his voice,. And his eyes. 'You know, MM,' I say, 'you are the only person in this country--perhaps in the whole wide world who calls him Sam still.' 'Yes and I'll be damned if I should ever join your ridiculous _Excellency__ charade. I would sooner be deported!' '_Sam__ is even more ridiculous, you know. It's a name that no longer fits the object. But then you have never been a good judge of what fits or doesn't ... which is your great attraction.' 'Thank you,' he says with an embarrassed, boyish smile. At such moments the mischievous lad living inside him peers through his eyes. Beatrice who has said very little up to now asks pointedly: 'Tell me, would you walk up to your Queen and say, "Hi, Elizabeth"?' 'To hell, I wouldn't. But why are all you fellows so bent on turning this sunshine paradise into bleak Little England? Sam is no bloody queen. I tell you he was such a nice fellow in those days. He had a wholesome kind of innocence about him. He was ... what shall I say? He was morally and intellectually intact--a kind of virgin, if you get my meaning. Not in its prudish sense, of course. He was more assured, knew a lot more than his fellow English officers and damn well spoke better English, I tell you. And yet he could still be pleasantly surprised by things ... I found that so healthy and so attractive ... You know I found him a girl once ...' 'Who?' asks Elewa shifting sideways on her bar-stool to join our group and bringing Ikem and his poetry friend in tow--the last ostensibly unwilling. 'His Very Excellency, your ladyship,' says Mad Medico bowing. 'I found him this girl after he left the Camberley hospital.' 'I had no idea you had a procuring past,' says Dick with a solemnity that seems surprising even for him. 'Well, you might call it that,' says Mad Medico. 'You must look at it this way, though. A nice young fellow comes all the way from the warmth of Africa to the inhospitable climate of an English hospital--no pun intended, by the way. And he is recovering miserably from double pneumonia. The least I could do was fix him up with a warm friendly girl to cheer him up. Nothing serious. A reasonable magistrate would let me off, I'm sure.' 'But woman done suffer for dis world-o,' says Elewa. 'A modern Desdemona, I see. Did she cheer him up?' asks Beatrice totally ignoring Elewa's more basic solidarity call. 'Did she indeed! He couldn't get her out of his system for years. He called me up the next morning. "Uncle John," he said, "you wicked old soul". And the way he laughed and seemed happy with the world after that! I shouldn't be in the least surprised if he also called long distance to Chris at the London School of Economics ... Did he?' 'Well, almost. That was a famous story. He didn't wait too long to tell me, I can tell you.' 'What did he tell you?' From Beatrice. 'NTBB.' 'NT what?' 'BB. You've just been told, BB. That's what my friends at the radio station write in bold yellow letters across the face of records too dirty to play on the air.' 'It means Not To Be Broadcast,' explains Ikem again. 'Chris might have added though that it doesn't now apply to dirty records alone. Anything _inconvenient__ to those in government is NTBB.' 'Quite right. I should have added that. My primary duty as Commissioner for Information, you see, is to decide what is inconvenient and inform Ikem who promptly rejects the information ... But going back to the more interesting subject, I confess I broke the code later and divulged the secret to BB.' 'To me?' asked Beatrice, wide-eyed. 'My own Beatrice?' 'Yes, I told you, didn't I, of the girl with the ... how shall I call it ... the invigorating tongue.' 'Oh! It's the same girl? Oh my God!' We burst into a laugh which left everyone in the cold as it were. 'You two seem to know something that even the procurer here doesn't appear to have heard;' said MM, 'but never mind.' The poetry editor has been trying for some time to recapture his lost little audience disrupted by Elewa's defection at the prospects of low talk. He makes one last bold bid and takes the entire company. The expression on his face has been quite funny for some time too. Actually he has an extremely expressive face if by expressive one means a constant procession of shadowy grimaces all of them indeterminate. You cannot look at him and say: now he is sad, or he is enjoying himself now. You always have to wait and figure it out and still you are not entirely sure. And then all of a sudden you are angry with yourself for letting your mind engage with so much trouble on something so inconsequential. He is that kind of infuriating person. His expression now is a puritanic scowl without the moral gravity of a puritan. 'We were so successful,' he is saying, as though unaware that his story was ever interrupted, 'that it became difficult to be sure that all the stuff that came in was _bona fide__ Reject. We did insist on the rejection slip accompanying every manuscript but anybody can make up a rejection slip. You know what I mean. Most magazines are pretty sloppy about their slips ... Like some girls, you know. Present company of course excepted ... They don't print them at the Royal Mint ... So there was really no way we could be absolutely certain that what we were getting was always genuine Reject. But as I was telling you ...' It seems that having got everyone again to listen to him his one desire now is to show his indifference to the rest of us by pretending to talk still to Ikem alone. Some people have nerve. '... our biggest problem was our success. We were soon printing no more than a fraction, a tiny fraction, of the manuscripts that came in. For a while I even toyed with the idea of a companion magazine to be called _Reject Two__ or _Double Reject__ which, I can tell you, would have been just as successful as _Reject__. But in the end I had to decide against it. Spreading yourself too thin, you know.' 'Fascinating,' says Ikem. 'When Chris fires me here perhaps I could hop across and run _Double Reject__ for you. I'm totally taken with the idea.' 'You're the editor of the local ...' 'Rag called the _National Gazette__,' says Mad Medico. 'Ikem is a fine journalist ... But shit! Who am I to be awarding him marks? Anyway, his brilliant editorials did as much as anything else to save me from the just consequences of my indiscretion. But what I want to say really is that he is an even finer poet, in my opinion one of the finest in the entire English language.' 'Yes, John told me what a fine poet you are. I'm ashamed to say I haven't yet read anything of yours but I certainly will now.' 'Take your time,' says Ikem. 'And remember MM is not a disinterested witness. I did him a good turn.' 'And I didn't tell you either,' said MM, 'that girl there sitting meekly and called Beatrice took a walloping honours degree in English from London University. She is better at it than either of us, I can assure you.' 'That doesn't surprise me in the least. I understand that the best English these days is written either by Africans or Indians. And that the Japanese and the Chinese may not be too far behind,' said Dick with somewhat dubious enthusiasm. PERHAPS MM had a point when he said Beatrice waited too long to meet me. Sometimes I wonder myself whether our relationship is not too sedate, whether we are not too much like a couple of tired swimmers resting at the railing. An early scene returns to my memory, a scene from two years ago and more, stored away in incredible detail and freshness yet, as I think of it, suffused also with ethereality. I offered to take Beatrice to the Restaurant Cathay and she said no. Chez Antoine? Still no. They were her two favourite places--not too large, no glaring lights and good food. What would she like to do then? 'Can I come home with you?' 'But of course,' was all I could find to say right away. I was still not sure that I had heard right. She divined the puzzlement in my mind and offered something like an explanation. 'We've both had a long day. All I want to do now is sit still somewhere and listen to records.' 'Wonderful!' Of course she had been to my place quite a few times before but the initiative had never come from her. It was not coyness but she had a style and above all a pace that I decided from the very beginning to respect. After the few whirlwind affairs I had had in my time including a full-fledged marriage in London for six months I was actually ready and grateful for BB's conservative style. Sometimes when I thought of her what came most readily to my mind was not roses or music but a good and tastefully produced book, easy on the eye. No pretentious distractions. Absolutely sound. Although I realized the folly of it I could not help comparing BB and my ex-wife. Louise was so bent on proving she had a mind of her own she proved instead totally frigid in bed despite weekly visits to the psychiatrist. There was another type--at the opposite pole--the aspirant sex symbol, flaunting her flesh before you. I'd met her too. Her style usually worked for a while and then out of nowhere a coldness descended into your soul and you wanted only to tell her to cut out the moans and all that ardent crap and get to it fast. Beatrice is a perfect embodiment of my ideal woman, beautiful without being glamorous. Peaceful but very strong. Very, very strong. I love her and will go at whatever pace she dictates. But sometimes I just wonder if I am not reading her signs wrong; if as MM says, without fully intending it, I have become too wizened by experience; if I have lost the touch, so to say. Neither of us was really hungry. So we decided on a bottle of wine and some fried shrimps. My cook, Sylvanus, was always upset if a guest came and he was not allowed to display the full extent of his culinary arts. Even as we ate his exquisite shrimps he kept at us. 'Make I fix madame small sometin,' he pleaded. We begged him not to worry and he went away but soon returned to hover around the door of the kitchen. He could not understand how two grown people could eat nothing but 'crayfish' for dinner. 'Or sometaim you wan go for hotel?' he said. And when Sylvanus said that you had to swear that his cooking was better than that of any chef, French, Italian or whatever on the west coast of Africa. 'No Sylvanus,' said Beatrice trying to mollify him, 'we no de go anywhere. We jus wan sidon for house. Make you take evening off. If at all oga wan anything I fit getam for am.' I knew at once and she soon realized she had committed a blunder. Sylvanus did not exactly storm out but his resentment was very clear on his face and in the tone of his goodnights. 'Do you know why I wanted us to come here and stay by ourselves?' 'Well, yes and no.' 'OK, let's have the yes first.' 'You don't want to be seen too often with me in public.' It sounded premeditated but wasn't. Beatrice didn't reply at once; she seemed to be weighing the point as if to say: there may be something there. Then she shook her head gently a few times and said simply: 'It was a year today that you first asked me to dinner here.' I was completely overwhelmed with feelings I had been skirting for months. I drew her to me on the sofa and kissed her--a little too roughly perhaps. I thought of making apologies for my own forgetfulness. With any other girl I would have proceeded to do so at once. But with her I couldn't pretend. I am not the anniversary kind and it would be utterly deceitful to say it just escaped my mind. I kissed her again and said instead: 'You are a great girl.' We were silent for quite a while. 'How long has Ikem known that Joy girl?' I asked. 'I can't tell you. I had only seen her a couple of times before this afternoon.' 'She seems so young. And so illiterate. What can he possibly be saying to her?' I asked. 'Ikem doesn't say much to any girl. He doesn't think they have enough brains.' 'Good for him, the great revolutionary.' 'Well, you know, I am exaggerating a little. But really women don't feature too much in his schemes except as, well, comforters. I think that's about the only chink in his revolutionary armour ... Do you notice how much he resents you now?' she asked in a sudden change of tack. 'I don't think you are even aware of it. It bothers me because it wasn't there before. I can see plenty of trouble ahead for the two of you.' 'Oh, you exaggerate. But you are right about the resentment. And I think it is quite natural. Especially since the coup and Sam's elevation and to a lesser degree mine. Literally Sam is now my boss and I am Ikem's boss.' 'Do you mean Ikem is jealous of you two?' 'Yes, why not? But I resent him just as much. Perhaps more, for his freedom.' 'I don't understand you people.' 'Very simple really. It goes back, you see, to our first days at Lord Lugard College. Ikem was the brightest in the class--first position every term for six years. Can you beat that? Sam was the social paragon ... He was the all-rounder--good student, captain of the Cricket Team, Victor Ludorum in athletics and, in our last year, School Captain. And girls worshipped at his feet from every Girls' School in the province. But strangely enough there was a kind of spiritual purity about Sam in those days despite his great weakness for girls. Maybe not purity but he seemed so perfect and so unreal, in a way.' 'Too much success.' 'Perhaps. Too much success. He never failed once in anything. Had the magic touch. And that's always deadly in the long run. He is paying the bills now, I think. And if we are not lucky we shall all pay dearly. How I wish he had gone to Medical School which had been his first ambition. But he fell instead under the spell of our English headmaster who fought the Italians in Abyssinia in 1941 and had a sword from an Ethiopian prince to prove it. So Sam enrolled in the first school cadet corps in the country and was on his way to Sandhurst.' 'I asked you about Ikem not His Excellency,' says BB, a mischievous twinkle in her eyes and snuggling closer to me. 'It's your fault. You are such a good listener.' 'And you haven't said anything about yourself,' she adds, ignoring my backhanded compliment. 'We are all connected. You cannot tell the story of any of us without implicating the others. Ikem may resent me but he probably resents Sam even more and Sam resents both of us most vehemently. We are too close together, I think. Lord Lugard College trained her boys to be lonely leaders in separate remote places, not cooped up together in one crummy family business.' 'OK, Ikem was the intellectual, Sam the socialite, what about you?' 'I have always been in the middle. Neither as bright as Ikem and not such a social success as Sam. I have always been the lucky one, in a way. There was a song we sang as children, do you know it? _The one in front spots evil spirits, the one at the rear has twisted hands, the one in the middle is the child of luck.__ Did you sing it? I was the child of luck.' 'Can I tell you something? You promise not to be angry? Promise? Well, you fellows, all three of you, are incredibly conceited. The story of this country, as far as you are concerned, is the story of the three of you ... But please go on.' 'Actually you are quite right. That's what I've just said myself. We tend sometimes to forget that our story is only one of twenty million stories--one tiny synoptic account. But that's the only one I know and you are such a sweet listener as I said.' 'A sweetener? A sweetener has its reasons ... By the way do you keep a detailed diary of what is happening day to day? I think you should. But please go on.' 'I do keep a journal. But, no let's change the subject. Tell me something for a change.' 'Today is your day ... Why should His Excellency resent the two of you? He has all the success.' I sense she merely wants me to keep talking. About anything. She finds my voice soothing, perhaps. At the same time she has such a quick mind and such a knack for asking inconvenient questions, like a precocious child. 'Why should he resent us? Why indeed? He has all the success. From school to Sandhurst; the first African Second Lieutenant in the Army; ADC to the GovernorGeneral; Royal Equerry during the Queen's visit; Officer Commanding at Independence; Colonel at the time of the coup; General and His Excellency, the Head of State, after. Why indeed should he resent any mortal? Now that you ask I confess I don't know. He wasn't like that right away. In fact he kept very close to us in the first six months or so. And then ... But let's talk about better things on the golden anniversary of our first date.' She shot up from my chest where she was lying and gave my face a quick scrutiny. 'I hope you are not being sarcastic,' she said. I affect great solemnity, pull her back and kiss her mildly. She offered up her lips again; we were both trembling. 'Hadn't I better be going?' 'Why? I thought you were staying.' 'Why?' 'Because I want you to.' 'Is that a good reason?' 'Yes.' 'I have a better one.' 'For going or staying?' 'For going.' 'What is it?' 'Because I don't want to ...' We laughed and I tried to kiss her but she covered my mouth with the palm of her hand ... 'Wait! I haven't finished yet ...' And she sang the rest: ' _but twelve o'clock done knack and my mama go vex with me.__' Then she re-arranged her countenance from the angelic model demanded by her song and offered to stay ... on one condition, she said. 'What is it? Don't tell me, I know.' 'What is it?' 'That I don't make love to you.' She shook her head. 'Maybe I should add that now that you mention it. Have another guess.' 'That we first talk about ourselves.' 'Who wants to hear any more about you? You will end up talking about other people, anyway.' 'I give up.' 'Promise me that you will go in now and switch off that air-conditioner in your bedroom.' I burst into uncontrollable laughter. BB, feigning great seriousness, informed me that she nearly froze to death just walking through to the bathroom a short while ago. Incredible girl, BB; her demands were never such as to break a man's back! Not for her the lover as tiger that some women crave, a bloody spoor strewn with shredded garments. The day I first made love to her, months after we began to go together, I wrote down in my diary: _Her passion begins like the mild ripples of some tropical river approaching the turbulence of a waterfall in slow, peaceful, immense orbits.__ Pompous? No. Immense. 'You were telling me about the white girl and your big friend,' she said abruptly, switching on the bed lamp I had just turned off and holding back my hand reaching again for the rope-switch. Before I could answer she said: 'Why did you call her a miracle worker?' I had said I would go at BB's pace but I'd be damned if I would spend the rest of the night talking about Sam and Gwen who had already come up for mention at lunch with Ikem and his new girl, Joy. So I went straight to the point. 'In the morning after a very exhausting night this girl, Gwen, wakes him up and wants to begin again. I remember how Sam put it: _My brother, there was absolutely nothing left in the pipeline.__ So Gwen swings herself around and picks up his limp wetin-call with her mouth. And from nowhere and like magic life surges back into it. Sam had never seen that kind of thing before.' BB didn't respond immediately except to get a little closer to me. Then she asked: 'You mean people actually do that?' 'All the time.' 'Disgusting,' she said. 'Well, I don't know.' 'You sound as if you wouldn't mind yourself. Or perhaps you have done it already.' 'No, I haven't. It's the girl who does it.' 'All right Mr. Smart. Has any girl done it for you?' 'Let's not make it personal.' 'OK. I won't pry any more. But I think it is disgusting, don't you? And they didn't even shower first, did they?' 'I wasn't there, you know; but I don't suppose they did. She woke him up as I understand it and went straight to work.' 'With all that stuff on it!' 'Dry and caked, yes.' 'Disgusting. I won't do that. Not for anybody.' 'Don't worry, love. I won't ever ask you.' 'What if it happens inside her mouth?' 'What? I see. But isn't that the whole point?' 'Na Beatrice you de ask? Na me de tell de tori, no be you?' 'Well that's the whole point, I am told. To give it to her right in the mouth.' 'You're joking!' 'I swear.' 'Chris, are you sure you haven't done it?' 'No. It's the girl who does it.' 'Oh shut up; you know what I mean. And don't you start anything because I won't wash it in my mouth.' 'We'll shower first.' 'You are joking. Oh Chris! Please.' SIX _Beatrice__ WHEN I PICKED UP the telephone and a completely unfamiliar voice said, 'Can I speak to Miss Beatrice Okoh,' my heart fluttered violently in panic fear. I don't know why but the thing that came into my mind right away was: Oh God, there's been an accident involving Chris, and someone is calling from the Casualty Ward of the Teaching Hospital. Why my mind should have gone to an accident I've no idea but the feeling was so strong that it blocked other lines of thought. So when the caller said, 'Hold on for His Excellency', my answer was a confused and near-hysterical: 'His what? Who are you?' It was only when the confident, resonant drawl asked if he was such an unwelcome caller that I realized what I had heard before and stammered an incoherent string of apologies. Even so, while he spoke, my thoughts kept leap-frogging over themselves and it was not until quite some time after he rang off that I had regained enough composure to begin to sort out the details of what he had said. He was inviting me to a small private dinner. On Saturday. Something important and personal he wanted to talk to me about. A car would be sent to pick me up from my flat at six-thirty. Dress absolutely informal, or even casual. See you then. And he rang off. Just like that! In the early days of his coming to power I had gone fairly often to the Palace with Chris and sometimes Chris and Ikem. But then things had changed quite dramatically after about one year and now apart from viewing him virtually every night on television news I had not actually set eyes on him nor had any kind of direct contact for well over a year. So the telephone call and the invitation were baffling to me and totally unexpected. Of course Chris had kept me posted on the steady deterioration in their relationship. Would the important and personal discussion be about that? Was I going to find myself listening to awkward recrimination between two friends who'd known each other since I was in nappies ... Well, not exactly but almost. That might account for the very early time of six-thirty. It was only then it occurred to me that I was simply assuming that I would be going to the Palace as in the old days with Chris but that nothing of the sort had been said in the invitation. So I rushed to the telephone and called Chris's house without luck and then his office where he was at work as usual long after everybody else had gone home, eaten their lunch and even had their siesta, and told him the news. No, he hadn't been asked but he would rather not talk on the telephone. He would pass by my place on his way home shortly. That was on a Thursday evening. My doorbell rang at exactly six-twenty-five. I was at the dressing-table and soon could hear Agatha, as prompt on the Sabbath as on any other day to open the front door to callers, in lively conversation with a male voice. When she had had whoever it was as long to herself as she thought necessary she came to the door of the bedroom to inform me that one soja-man from President house de for door; he say na President sendam make he come bring madam. 'Tellam make he siddon,' I said, 'I de nearly ready.' Soon the two voices were floating in to me again as I put on the finishing touches. When I got to the living-room a couple of minutes later Agatha was just disappearing through the kitchen door. The soldier who was still on his feet saluted as I entered and I began at once to apologize for my maid's manners in not offering him a seat. 'No be like dat madam,' he said gallantly. 'Your girl polite well well. She tell me make I siddon, she even ask wetin I wan drink. So no be her fault at all madam. Na me one refuse for siddon. You know this soja work na stand-stand work e be.' 'OK. You are taking me to the Palace? I am ready.' 'Ah madam. No be Palace we de go. Na for Palace dem tell you?' 'What? Na where we de go?' 'You mean to say dem no tell you? Wonderful! Na for President Guest House for Abichi Lake na there dem say make I take you. And dat must correct because why? the President been de there since yesterday. He no dey for Palace at all.' The strange feelings I had been nursing since Thursday afternoon now threatened to explode in violent froths of anger as this latest ingredient of insult was dropped with such casualness into the brew. God! Who did this fellow think he was? First he orders me to dinner and rings off before I have had time to express my profound gratitude. Then he doesn't think it is necessary to warn me that I have a forty-mile journey to make for the privilege! What in heaven's name was going on in this country? My first act of rebellion which was to bring a wan smile to my face five minutes later for its sheer futility was to refuse my escort's offer to sit in the owner's corner of the black Mercedes standing in my driveway. As he rushed ahead of me and opened and held the door I simply said sorry, walked over to the other side and let myself in. The chauffeur turned sharply round on his seat perhaps to get a good look at today's eccentric cargo. When I said good evening to him on top of all that, he seemed dazed to begin with and then his bafflement gave way to a wide happy grin which pleased me very much for it confirmed that I had successfully compounded my rebellion--first to spurn a seat of honour and then to greet a mere driver first. That was when I smiled at myself and my puny, empty revolts, the rebellion of a mouse in a cage. And I recalled Chris's advice to me to stay cool no matter what. My complaint that the fellow had not even bothered to ask if I was free nor wait for me to accept had merely brought an indulgent smile to Chris's face. 'Look, BB,' he said. 'In any country and any language in the world an invitation by the Head of State is a virtual command even when he does not pick up the phone personally to issue it. So my dear girl you will go and you may do some good. Sam is not such a fool you know. He knows things are now pretty hopeless and may see in you a last hope to extricate himself. You may be able to help.' 'How?' 'My dear, I don't know. But let's keep all options open. It's never too late.' Chris is damn too reasonable. That's all I can say. All options? I knew of one at least I would not keep open. We got to Abichi village and then the lake at about seven-thirty. Although I had been to the Presidential Retreat twice before it was both in daytime. Going up to it now with the great shimmering expanse of the artificial lake waters stretching eastwards into the advancing darkness on your left and the brightly lit avenue taking you slowly skywards in gigantic circles round and up the hill, on top of which the Presidential Retreat perches like a lighthouse, was a movingly beautiful experience even to a mood as frayed and soured as mine that evening. The rumoured twenty million spent on its refurbishment by the present administration since the overthrow of the civilians who had built it at a cost of forty-five million may still be considered irresponsibly extravagant in our circumstances but ... But what? Careful now, before you find yourself slowly and secretly leaning towards Chris's reasonableness! As a matter of fact he and Ikem had had one of their fierce arguments in my presence over the vast sums spent on the refurbishment of the Retreat. Money, incidentally, which had not been passed through the normal Ministry of Finance procedures. On that occasion I had been totally on the side of Ikem. 'Retreat from what? From whom?' I recall him demanding with characteristic heat. 'From the people and their basic needs of water which is free from Guinea worm, of simple shelter and food. That's what you are retreating from. You retreat up the hill and commune with your cronies and forget the very people who legitimize your authority.' 'Don't put it on me,' cried Chris. And then he side-stepped the issue completely to produce one of those beautiful historical vignettes his incredibly wide reading and fluency makes him so good at. Nations, he said, were fostered as much by structures as by laws and revolutions. These structures where they exist now are the pride of their nations. But everyone forgets that they were not erected by democratically-elected Prime Ministers but very frequently by rather unattractive, bloodthirsty medieval tyrants. The cathedrals of Europe, the Taj Mahal of India, the pyramids of Egypt and the stone towers of Zimbabwe were all raised on the backs of serfs, starving peasants and slaves. Our present rulers in Africa are in every sense late-flowering medieval monarchs, even the Marxists among them. Do you remember Mazrui calling Nkrumah a Stalinist Czar? Perhaps our leaders have to be that way. Perhaps they may even need to be that way. 'Bloody reformist,' said Ikem, infuriated and impressed for though he may be a great writer yet when it comes to speaking off the cuff he is no match for Chris. A pleasant-faced army major searched my handbag at the entrance and another officer took me up a wide and red-carpeted flight of stairs. At the landing a huge open door led into an enormous and opulent room where guests were already settled in. As soon as I had appeared at the door His Excellency had rushed out to meet me, planted a kiss on my forehead and led me by the hand into the room. The guests sat in scattered groups of twos and threes on chairs, settees and pouffes drinking and dipping into bowls of assorted finger-food laid out on stools and on the floor. 'Who don't we know?' asked the host and without waiting for an answer added: 'Let's start with the ladies.' Meanwhile the men had all struggled to their feet to stand guard, as it were. 'Come and meet Miss Cranford of the American United Press. Lou is in Bassa to see if all the bad news they hear about us in America is true.' The dark-haired girl who would have fitted my stereotype of an Italian beauty if I hadn't been told she was American was smiling and playing her hands like a pair of cymbals to get them free of salted peanuts in preparation for a hand-shake which when it came would have given her Americanness away for its over-eager firmness. Meanwhile His Excellency was literally reciting my CV. 'Lou, this is one of the most brilliant daughters of this country, Beatrice Okoh. She is a Senior Assistant Secretary in the Ministry of Finance--the only person in the service, male or female, with a first-class honours in English. And not from a local university but from Queen Mary College, University of London. Our Beatrice beat the English to their game. We're very proud of her.' 'Wow,' said Lou. 'That's terrific. How did you do it Beatrice?' The rest was routine. There were I think eight men and seven women including myself. Of the men I knew only one reasonably well--Joe Ibe, the Commissioner for Works. When His Excellency got to him and said: 'But of course you know Beatrice,' he had replied: 'Me? I am sorry sir, I have never seen her before,' which must be about the most predictable and tired of Bassa witticisms and yet it always produced some laughter most of it on this occasion from the humorist himself who immediately added as if to bring everything down again to the literal level of those not bright enough for high humour: 'Long time no see, Beatrice. How's my friend Chris?' To which I replied with my own feeble effort at joke-making: 'But I should ask you. You see him more often than I do. He is always at one or other of your meetings.' 'That's what he tells you?' And that really cracked everybody up. 'Joe is right, you know,' said His Excellency with a wink. 'If I were you I would do spot checks now and again.' As soon as the introductions were over the American journalist came rushing to me to say she hoped that besides getting acquainted this evening we would be able to sit down somewhere in the next seven days over a meal or something and talk about things in general. Especially the woman's angle, you know. To which I replied rather sharply that I couldn't see what a reporter who could stroll in any time and get it all direct from the horse's mouth could want to hear from the likes of me. Involuntarily perhaps her eyes narrowed into a fighting squint for the briefest moment and then just as swiftly changed tactics back to friendliness. 'I won't leave the country now without talking to you,' she said. 'Not after all the things I've just heard. It's a promise!' And she moved off and left me in peace for the moment. I knew I had been unduly shrill in our brief exchange. But I seemed not to be fully in control of my responses. Something tougher than good breeding had edged it aside in a scuffle deep inside me and was imparting to my casual words the sharp urgency of incantation. I assumed to begin with that I was still over-reacting to the abnormal circumstances of my invitation to the party and remembered Chris's advice to remain calm. To his shade I promised now to try harder. So these were the new power-brokers around His Excellency! I was seeing the controversial Director of SRC at close quarters for the first time and did not, as I might have expected, like him in the least. He is youngish and good-looking, and strong in a vaguely disagreeable way. Perhaps it was those enormous hands of his like a wrestler's which struck you at once as being oversize even for a man as big as he. I think he feels awkward about them and is constantly shifting them around from beside to behind him and then inside his pockets which of course draws more attention to them. He speaks only when spoken to and then in an absurdly soft voice. And to finish him off finally as far as I was concerned he was so excessively obsequious to His Excellency during the dinner. Was he a guest like the rest of us or some kind of superior steward? He would leave a guest in mid-sentence and go after the serving crew because a glass somewhere was three-quarters empty. The Chief of Army Staff was more popularly known, more self-assured and a more agreeable person altogether. The ladies were the most surprising. They were all overdressed or perhaps nobody had told them about the informality of the occasion; and none of them had very much to say. These couldn't be some of the wild and fashionable set that rumour claimed dominated His Excellency's current party life. Perhaps this drab group was chosen on pathetically incompetent advice to impress the American girl. Wasn't it conceivable that some daft fellow on the President's staff seeing so many raving American and Americantrained preachers on sponsored religious programmes nightly on television might actually believe that a show of Presidential decorum would be desirable! The food was simple and tasty. Shrimp cocktail; _jollof__ rice with plantain and fried chicken; and fresh fruit salad or cheese and English crackers for dessert. The wines were excellent but totally wasted on the company, only His Excellency, the American girl and myself showing the slightest interest. The Bassa men stuck as usual to the beer they had been drinking all day; one of the ladies had double gins and lime and the other two a shandy of stout and Seven Up which one of them--Irene, I think her name was-apostrophized as _Black Is Beautiful__. His Excellency was a perfect host. From the head of the oval-shaped table he dispensed conviviality and put every one at their ease. Had there been just a little less eagerness on the part of the guests to agree with everything he said and laugh excessively whenever they thought he was making a joke the evening might have been quite remarkable really. He had placed me on his right and the American girl on his left so that we faced each other across a thin end of the oval. On my right was the reticent Major Ossai and across the table from him the Commissioner for Works. The Chief of Army Staff controlled the far end of the table like a second-class chief attentive, whenever required to do so, to the paramount chief but sometimes out on his own quietly filling the gin-and-lime girl with giggles. The host's efforts to get the American girl and me talking together failed dismally. I simply couldn't muster anything you could call enthusiasm to sustain an exchange even with the Head of State chipping in to fan the failing flames. The other, after my initial rebuff was no more than merely polite. Whenever I was not talking to the host I would turn to the gentleman on my right and engage him seemingly in deep exchanges. And he was ideal for my purpose having no greater will for social courtesies than a standby generator has to produce electricity when the mains are performing satisfactorily. The American girl drank three large glasses of Moselle in addition to the dry sherry she had had as a starter with the shrimp cocktail and whatever else she had tucked away in the lounge before dinner, all of which was clearly proving too much for her. She became increasingly voluble and less restrained as the evening wore on although she still seemed in full control of her faculties as far as giving me the widest possible berth was concerned. Which of course suited me very well. I could listen and watch without appearing to do so and without the strain of exchanging politeness for provocation. Her manner with His Excellency was becoming outrageously familiar and domineering. She would occasionally leave him hanging on a word she had just spoken while she turned to fling another at Major Ossai whom she now addressed only as Johnson. And wonder of wonders she even referred to the Chief of Staff, General Lango, as Ahmed on one occasion. And for these effronteries she got nothing but grins of satisfaction from the gentlemen in question. Unbelievable! But we hadn't seen noth'n yet. Without any kind of preamble she began reading His Excellency and his subjects a lecture on the need for the country to maintain its present (quite unpopular, needless to say) levels of foreign debt servicing currently running at slightly more than fifty-one percent of total national export earnings. Why? As a _quid pro quo__ for increased American aid in surplus grains for our drought provinces! 'Have you been reading editorials in the _National Gazette__ lately?' I asked in utter dumbfoundment. 'Yes, Johnson kindly showed me some comments earlier in the week. The editor who I hear is a Marxist of sorts appears to imagine he can eat his cake as well as have it, as we all tend to do this side of democracy. Admiring Castro may be fine if you don't have to live in Cuba or even Angola. But the strange fact is that Dr Castro, no matter what he says, never defaults in his obligations to the international banking community. He says to others, "Don't pay," while making sure he doesn't fall behind himself in his repayments. What we must remember is that banks are not houses of charity. They're there to lend money at a fair and reasonable profit. If you deny them their margin of profit by borrowing and not paying back they will soon have to shut down their operations and we shall all go back to saving our money in grandmother's piggy-banks.' 'Or inside old mattresses,' added His Excellency whose deferential attitude to this piece of impertinence had given me a greater shock than anything I could think of in recent times. Deference and a countenance of martyred justification. He seemed to be saying to the girl, 'Go on; tell them. I have gone hoarse shouting the very same message to no avail.' And _them__ in the context was _me__. What I did when the dancing started may need a little background. We left the dinner-table and reconvened in the greater ease of the lounge for coffee and liqueur during which His Excellency and Lou were ensconced in deep and intense conversation on a sofa. Then suddenly I heard my name. 'Beatrice, come and sit here by me,' he ordered patting the sofa on the other side of him. 'African Chiefs are always polygamists.' Naturally this was greeted with an explosion of laughter. He seemed a little tipsy to me. 'Polygamy is for Africa what monotony is for Europe,' he pronounced into the still raging flames of laughter stoking them recklessly to the peril of the rafters. I think the girl beside him had chipped in 'And America!' but I can't bet on it, such was the uproar. Before his voice had impinged on my thoughts I had temporarily withdrawn into them while physically appearing to attend to the Commissioner of Works struggling overconscientiously with an almost casual comment from General Lango that our highways break up even as they are being laid unlike highways he had seen in Europe and America and even Kenya. The Commissioner who had obviously been long enough in contact with professionals to have picked up a smattering of their language was explaining to a now inattentive general something about the weight of heavy lorries not being the real problem but rather their axle weight or something to that effect. At that point a renewed sense of questioning had assailed me and I had withdrawn to attend to it. Why am I here? Why was I sent for? Obviously the reason that had first offered itself that it might have to do with mediating between two old friends (even in the absence of one of them) could hardly stand a chance now. Why was I there then? To meet this American girl and arrange to give her the woman's angle. That was it! I had been dragged here to wait upon this cheeky girl from Arizona or somewhere. Fine. We shall see! And then came the master's voice summoning me to have my turn in the bedchamber of African polygamy! The first time it happened I was a student in England. My boyfriend had taken me to an end-of-year dance at St Pancras Town Hall. It was crowded and we eventually had to share a table with someone my boyfriend knew who was already seated with a white girl. After a couple of dances I whispered into Guy's ear that we should exchange partners out of politeness. After two dances with the white girl Guy went completely berserk. He would withdraw with her to the farthest corner of the huge dance-hall and stay there at the end of one dance waiting for the band to strike up another number. The white girl's boyfriend danced a couple of numbers with me and vanished altogether. So I found myself dancing with strangers who had come to the party with no girls of their own. I became _kabu kaboo__, for the first time in my life. When Guy and the girl finally showed up again at our table during a longish interval and he promptly took off to buy drinks, the girl said to me in her heavy Cockney as she peered into her handbag mirror to mend her rouge: 'Your boys like us, ain' they? My girlfriend saiz it's the Desdemona complex. Nice word Des-de-mona. Italian I think. Ever hear it?' So I was locked in combat again with Desdemona, this time itinerant and, worse still, not over some useless black trash in England but the sacred symbol of my nation's pride, such as it was. Corny? So be it! So I threw myself between this enemy and him. I literally _threw__ myself at him like a loyal batman covering his endangered commander with his own body and receiving the mortal bullet in his place. I did it shamelessly. I cheapened myself. God! I did it to your glory like the dancer in a Hindu temple. Like Esther, oh yes like Esther for my long-suffering people. And was I glad the king was slowly but surely responding! Was I glad! The big snake, the royal python of a gigantic erection began to stir in the shrubbery of my shrine as we danced closer and closer to soothing airs, soothing our ancient bruises together in the dimmed lights. Fully aroused he clung desperately to me. And I took him then boldly by the hand and led him to the balcony railings to the breathtaking view of the dark lake from the pinnacle of the hill. And there told him my story of Desdemona. Something possessed me as I told it. 'If I went to America today, to Washington DC, would I, could I, walk into a White House private dinner and take the American President hostage. And his Defence Chief and his Director of CIA?' 'Oh don't be such a racist, Beatrice. I am surprised at you. A girl of your education!' And he stormed away and left me standing alone on the balcony. I stood there staring at the dark lake and my tears flowed in torrents. I was aware of people from the room coming stealthily to the door of the balcony to have a peep. I did not see them; I was merely aware of their coming and retreating again into their dimmed lights and music. Then I heard bold footsteps on the terrazzo floor of the balcony and Major Ossai's voice behind me: 'There is a car waiting downstairs to take you home.' SEVEN FOR WEEKS AND MONTHS after I had definitely taken on the challenge of bringing together as many broken pieces of this tragic history as I could lay my hands on I still could not find a way to begin. Anything I tried to put down sounded wrong--either too abrupt, too indelicate or too obvious--to my middle ear. So I kept circling round and round. Until last Saturday; after my weekly ordeal at the market. Hot and grimy from hours of haggling in the sun and now home and fighting for breath after the steep climb with the grocery up the dizzying circular staircase to the kitchen table I dumped the bags and wraps there in transit as it were to get a cold drink, and never went back. Quite extraordinary. Normally I am very particular about the meat especially which I must wash and boil right away or wash with a dash of Milton solution and put in the freezer. But, after gulping down half of the tall glass of lemonade, I carried the rest under a strange propulsion to the spare bedroom which I had turned into a kind of study and began scribbling and went on right into the night. I was vaguely aware of Agatha's voice saying good evening at the door at some point but took no special interest in it. The single idea or power or whatever that flashed through my mind that afternoon as soon as I got out of the traffic into the open stretch between the Secretariat Buildings and the GRA had seized me by the forelock! But although it got me seated it neglected to dictate the words to me because on Monday I had to begin all over again having thrown away all that labour of Saturday and Sunday. But the elation was undiminished. I had started. The discarded pages and the nearly spoilt meat seemed like a necessary ritual or a sacrifice to whoever had to be appeased for this audacity of rushing in where sensible angels would fear to tread, or rather for pulling up one of those spears thrust into the ground by the men in the hour of their defeat and left there in the circle of their last dance together. My housegirl, Agatha, goes to one of these new rapturous churches with which Bassa is infested nowadays. Her sect is called YESMI, acronym for Yahwe Evangelical Sabbath Mission Inc., and apparently forbids her from as much as striking a match on Saturdays to light a stove. She leaves the house before I am out of bed and stays away all day. Around five she returns looking like a wilted cocoyam leaf and eats bread and cold stew or any odd scrap of food she can lay her hands on or even plain _garri__ soaked in iced water with eight lumps of sugar and a whole tin of milk. I discovered, though, that if I struck the match and lit the stove and warmed up the food she would not be prohibited from eating it. But I made it clear to her from the start that I wasn't ready yet to wash and wipe the feet of my paid help. It is quite enough that I have to do the weekly grocery at the Gelegele market while she is clapping hands and rolling eyes and hips at some hairychested prophet in white robes and shower cap. But something had happened not so long ago to change our lives and, on this particular Saturday, Agatha must have been so overcome by the sheer power of something else quite extraordinary happening in the house that she set the law of the Sabbath aside and put away the meat, already a little high, and the wilting vegetables. Or perhaps, being no stranger herself to possession, she could recognize it quite quickly in another! My name is Beatrice, but most of my friends call me either B or BB. And my enemies--that's one lesson I've learnt from the still unbelievable violences we went through--that even little people like me could also rate enemies. I had naively assumed that enemies were the privilege of the great. But no. Here was I keeping quite a few hands busy fashioning barbed and poisoned aliases for me as readily as they were renaming the heroes fallen, as our half-literate journalists say, from grace to grass. It was quite a revelation, and quite frankly it bothered me for a while, especially the crude insinuations of what our men sniggeringly call bottom-power. But then I said to myself, what do I care really, why should I ask the world to interrupt its business for no other reason than to find out what one insignificant female did or did not do in a calamity that consumed so many and so much? A little matter of personal pride for me perhaps but so what? Still there is one account of me it seems I will never get used to, which can still bring tears to my eyes. Ambitious. Me ambitious! How? And it is this truly unjust presentation that's forcing me to expose my life on these pages to see if perhaps there are aspects of me I had successfully concealed even from myself. Pretentious journalists hoping to catch the attention of the new military rulers created an image of me as 'the latter-day Madame Pompadour' who manipulated generals and patronized writers. Throughout my life I have never sought attention; not even as a child. I can see, looking back at my earliest memories, a little girl completely wrapped up in her own little world--a world contained, like Russian dolls, inside the close-fitting world of our mission-house, itself enclosed snugly within the world of the Anglican Church compound. It was a remarkable place. Apart from the church building itself there were the two school buildings, the parsonage, the catechist's house, the long-house in which the school teachers had, according to their rank, a shared room, a full room or even two rooms. Male teachers, that is. The female teachers lived in the smallest building of all, a three-room thatched house set, for protection I suppose, between the pastor and the catechist. In the farthest corner of the compound was the churchyard, a little overgrown, where one of my sisters, Emily lay buried. World inside a world inside a world, without end. _Uwa-t'uwa__ in our language. As a child how I thrilled to that strange sound with its capacity for infinite replication till it becomes the moan of the rain in the ear as it opened and closed, opened and closed. Uwa t'uwa t'uwa t'uwa; Uwa t'uwa. _Uwa-t'uwa__ was a building-block of my many solitary games. I could make and mould all kinds of thoughts with it. I could even rock it from side to side like my wooden baby with the chipped ear. My friendship with the strange words began no doubt quite early when I first recognized it and welcomed it at the end of my father's family prayers to begin or end the day--prayers so long that I would float in and out of sleep and sometimes keel over and fall on my side. _Uwa-t'uwa__ was always the end of the ordeal and we all, would shout: _Amen! Good-morning, sah! good morning mah!__ or good night for evening prayers. One evening, some devil seized hold of me as the words _uwa t'uwa__ were pronounced and jolted me into wakefulness. Without any premeditation whatsoever I promptly raised a childish hymn of thanksgiving: uwa-t'uwa! uwa-t'uwa! uwa-t'uwa! uwa-t'uwa! t'uwa t'uwa! uwa t'uwa! My sisters' giggles fuelled my reckless chant. My father sprang to his feet with Amen barely out of his mouth, reached for the cane he always had handy and gave us all a good thrashing. As we cried ourselves to sleep on our separate mats that night my sisters saw fit to promise through their snivelling to deal with me in the morning. He was a very stern man, my father--as distant from us children as from our poor mother. As I grew older I got to know that his whip was famous not only in our house and in the schoolhouse next door but throughout the diocese. One day the local chief paid him a visit and as they sat in the long outer room we called the piazza eating kolanut with alligator pepper and I was hanging around as I was fond of doing when there was company, the chief was full of praise for my father for the good training he was giving the children of the village through his whip. My father, with a wistful look I had never seen on his face before, was telling the chief of a certain headmaster in 1940 who was praised by some white inspectors who came from England to look at schools in their colonies and found his school the most quiet in West Africa. 'Das right!' said the chief in English. I remember the incident well because we were doing the map of West Africa in our geography class at the time. So I left my father and his friend and went to my raffia school-bag and pulled out my _West African Atlas__ and was greatly impressed by the size of the territory over which the 1940 headmaster was champion. There were times I suspected that he may have flogged our poor mother, though I must say in recognition of the awesomeness of the very thought that I never actually saw it happen. None of my sisters had seen it either, or if they had they preferred not to tell me, for they never took me much into confidence. Looking back on it I am sometimes amazed at the near-conspiracy in which they circled me most of the time. I had this strong suspicion nevertheless, which I could neither confirm nor deny because on those occasions my father always took the precaution to lock the door of their room. She would come out afterwards (having unlocked the door, or perhaps he did) wiping her eyes with one corner of her wrapper, too proud or too adult to cry aloud like us. It didn't happen too often, though. But it always made me want to become a sorceress that could say '_Die!__' to my father and he would die as in the folk-tale. And then, when he had learnt his lesson, I would bring him back to life and he would never touch his whip again. And then one day as my mother came out wiping her eyes I rushed to her and hugged her legs but instead of pressing me to herself as I had expected she pushed me away so violently that I hit my head against the wooden mortar. After that I didn't feel any more like telling my father to die. I couldn't have been more than seven or eight at the time but I know I had this strong feeling then--extraordinary, powerful and adult--that my father and my mother had their own world, my three sisters had theirs and I was alone in mine. And it didn't bother me at all then, my aloneness, nor has it done so since. I didn't realize until much later that my mother bore me a huge grudge because I was a girl--her fifth in a row though one had died--and that when I was born she had so desperately prayed for a boy to give my father. This knowledge came to me by slow stages which I won't go into now. But I must mention that in addition to Beatrice they had given me another name at my baptism, Nwanyibuife--A female is also something. Can you beat that? Even as a child I disliked the name most intensely without being aware of its real meaning. It merely struck me at that point that I knew of nobody else with the name; it seemed fudged! Somehow I disliked it considerably less in its abridged form, Buife. Perhaps it was the _nwanyi__, the female half of it that I particularly resented. My father was so insistent on it. 'Sit like a female!' or 'Female soldier' which he called me as he lifted me off the ground with his left hand and gave me three stinging smacks on the bottom with his right the day I fell off the cashew tree. But I didn't set out to write my autobiography and I don't want to do so. Who am I that I should inflict my story on the world? All I'm trying to say really is that as far as I can remember I have always been on my own and never asked to be noticed by anybody. Never! And I don't recall embarking ever on anything that would require me to call on others. Which meant that I never embarked on anything beyond my own puny powers. Which meant finally that I couldn't be ambitious. I am very, very sensitive about this--I don't mind admitting it. That I got involved in the lives of the high and mighty was purely accidental and was not due to any scheming on my part. In the first place, they all became high and mighty _after__ I met them; not before. Chris was not a Commissioner when I met him but a mere editor of the _National Gazette__. That was way back in civilian days. And if I say that Chris did all the chasing I am not boasting or anything. That was simply how it was. And I wasn't being coy either. It was a matter of experience having taught me in my little lonely world that I had to be wary. Some people even say I am suspicious by nature. Perhaps I am. Being a girl of maybe somewhat above average looks, a good education, a good job you learn quickly enough that you can't open up to every sweet tongue that comes singing at your doorstep. Nothing very original really. Every girl knows that from her mother's breast although thereafter some may choose to be dazzled into forgetfulness for one reason or another. Or else they panic and get stampeded by the thought that time is passing them by. That's when you hear all kinds of nonsense talk from girls: Better to marry a rascal than grow a moustache in your father's compound; better an unhappy marriage than an unhappy spinsterhood; better marry Mr. Wrong in this world than wait for Mr. Right in heaven; all marriage is _how-for-do__; all men are the same; and a whole baggage of other foolishnesses like that. I was determined from the very beginning to put my career first and, if need be, last. That every woman wants a man to complete her is a piece of male chauvinist bullshit I had completely rejected before I knew there was anything like Women's Lib. You often hear our people say: But that's something you picked up in England. Absolute rubbish! There was enough male chauvinism in my father's house to last me seven reincarnations! So when Chris came along I was not about to fly into his arms for the asking, although I decidedly liked him. And strangely enough he himself gave me a very good reason for caution. He was so handsome and so considerate, so unlike all the brash fellows the place was crawling with in the heady prosperity of the oil boom that I decided he simply had to be phoney! Unreasonable? Perhaps yes. But I can't be blamed for the state of the world. Haven't our people said that a totally reasonable wife is always pregnant? Scepticism is a girl's number six. You can't blame her; she didn't make her world so tough. One of my girlfriends--a more sensible and attractive person you never saw-except that she committed the crime to be twenty-six and still unmarried; she was taken by her fianc to meet his people in some backwater village of his when an aunt or something of his made a proverb fully and deliberately to her hearing that if _ogili__ was such a valuable condiment no one would leave it lying around for rats to stumble upon and dig into! Well, you can trust Comfort! The insult didn't bother her half as much as her young man's silence. So she too kept silent until they got back to the city and inside her flat. Then she told him she had always suspected he was something of a rat. I can hear Comfort saying that and throwing him out of the flat! Now she is happily married to a northerner and has two kids. My experience with Chris was, of course, entirely different. He seemed to understand everything about me without asking a single question. In those first days he would very often startle me with insights about little things like colours or food or behaviour I liked or didn't like and I would ask: But how did you know? And he would smile and say: I am a journalist, remember; it's my business to find out. Just the way he said it would melt any woman. Emotionally then I had no reservations whatsoever about Chris from the word go. But intellectually I had to call into full play my sense of danger. In a way I felt like two people living inside one skin, not two hostile tenants but two rather friendly people, two people different enough to be interesting to each other without being incompatible. I recall clearly that the very first time we met the thought that flashed through my mind was to be envious of his wife. And yet it was weeks before I could bring myself to probe delicately about her, not directly through Chris but surreptitiously via a third party, Ikem. But such was the carefully balanced contrariness induced in me by Chris that the news of his wife's nonexistence, though it admittedly gave me a measure of relief, did not bring total satisfaction. There was a small residue of disappointment at the bottom of the cool draught, so to say. Was it the disappointment of the gambler or the born fighter cheated out of the intoxication of contest and chancy victory? Or did the affair lose some of its attraction for me because deep inside I was not unlike the dreadful, cynical aunt in the village who believed that nothing so good could wait this long for me to stumble upon? What an awful thought! Even when I found myself begin to pick and choose what dress or what make-up to wear whenever I thought I might run into him I simply dismissed it as a little harmless excitement I was entitled to indulge in as long as I remembered to keep a sharp look-out. It was in a supermarket one Saturday morning, I think, that Ikem gave me an opening to ask about Chris's wife. I don't remember the exact details now but I think it was a vague invitation to go with him, his girlfriend and Chris to some friend of their's birthday party. I said no for one reason or the other but also managed to ask as offhandedly as I could where Chris's wife was anyway; or was he one of those who will pack their wife conveniently away to her mother and the village midwife as soon as she misses her period? 'BB!' he screamed in mock outrage, his large eyes beaming with wicked pleasure. 'Looking at your demure lips ...' 'I know, I know. You couldn't tell, could you? Like looking at a king's mouth you couldn't tell, could you?' 'Or looking at a lady's gait, you couldn't tell, could you?' 'Enough!' I said in my own counterfeit outrage, my index finger against my lips. 'All I asked you was where your friend packs his wife.' 'There is no wife, my dear. So you can rest easy.' 'Me! Wetin concern me there.' 'Plenty plenty. I been see am long time, my dear.' 'See what? I beg commot for road,' and I made to push my trolley past him to the cashier but he grabbed my arm and pulled me back and proceeded to give me in loud whispers accompanied by conspiratorial backward glances a long and completely absurd account of all the actions and reactions he had meticulously observed between Chris and me in the last few months which could only have one meaning--his friend, Chris, done catch! 'You de craze well, well ... I beg make you commot for road.' That was the year I got back from England. I had known Ikem for years--right from my London University days. How he did it I can't tell but he became instantly like a brother to me. He had completed his studies two or three years earlier and was just knocking about London doing odd jobs for publishers, reading his poetry at the Africa Centre and such places and writing for Third World journals, before his friends at home finally persuaded him to return and join them in nation-building. 'Such crap!' he would say later in remembrance. When he finally left for home I was just getting into my degree year at Queen Mary College and we had become very close indeed. There was a short period when the relationship veered and teetered on the brink of romance but we got it back to safety and I went on with Guy, my regular boyfriend and he with his breathless succession of girlfriends. I have sat and talked and argued with Ikem on more things serious and unserious than I can remember doing with any other living soul. Naturally I think he is a fantastic writer and it has given me such wonderful encouragement to have him praise the odd short story and poem I have scribbled from time to time. I don't even mind too much that his way of praising my style was to call it muscular on one occasion and masculine on another! When I pointed this out to him jokingly as a sure sign of his chauvinism he was at first startled and then he smiled one of those total smiles of his that revealed the innocent child behind the mask of beard and learned fierceness. In the last couple of years we have argued a lot about what I have called the chink in his armoury of brilliant and original ideas. I tell him he has no clear role for women in his political thinking; and he doesn't seem to be able to understand it. Or didn't until near the end. 'How can you say that BB?' he would cry, almost in despair. And I understand the meaning of his despair too. For here's a man, who has written a full-length novel and a play on the Women's War of 1929 which stopped the British administration cold in its tracks, being accused of giving no clear political role to women. But the way I see it is that giving women today the same role which traditional society gave them of intervening only when everything else has failed is not enough, you know, like the women in the Sembene film who pick up the spears abandoned by their defeated menfolk. It is not enough that women should be the court of last resort because the last resort is a damn sight too far and too late! That was about the only serious reservation I had about Ikem's political position. I have to admit that, although he tended to be somewhat cavalier with his girlfriends and has even been called unprincipled by no less a friend than Chris, he did in fact have the most profound respect for three kinds of women: peasants, market women and intellectual women. He could be considerate to a fault and I have known him to go to great lengths of personal inconvenience to help a lady in distress. I still have goose-flesh just thinking of one bitterly cold winter night he got himself stranded on the last train in London and nearly caught his death on my account. I had been foolish enough to telephone him after I had suffered one of the most humiliating evenings of my life in the hands of my boyfriend, Guy, at a Nigerian Christmas dance at the St Pancras Town Hall. I wasn't really asking Ikem to set out for my place at that hour but just needed to talk to someone like him, someone different from that noisy, ragtag crowd of illiterate and insensitive young men our country was exporting as plentifully at the time as its crude oil. But apparently I sounded so out of my mind on the telephone that Ikem donned his wool cap and muffler and his coat and headed into the snow and caught the last train in a South London station well after midnight. When he finally made it to my door, after an extended adventure on night buses, it was half-past three in the morning. I felt so bad I didn't need any further comfort for myself. I was ready to start cooking whatever meal would make him warm. Rice? Semolina? Plantain? He shook his head, his lips too frozen to speak. In the end all I could persuade him to take was a cup of coffee without cream or sugar; and he doffed his coat, slumped on the bed-sitter and went to sleep instantly. I stripped my bed of the last blanket and piled it on him. Of all the absurd things people have found to say about us lately the most ridiculous was to portray Ikem as one of my trio of lovers. Damn it, the fellow was a brother to me! In the last year I didn't see too much of him--a couple of times at Mad Medico's, a few times at parties and one or two visits to my house. He was never a great one for home visits but every one he made left a lasting impression. The final one was in August. I remember it was August because he walked into my flat out of a huge and unseasonal tropical storm. The doorbell screeched in the kitchen followed by loud, panic bangs on the front door. I sprang up not to answer it but to bar the way to my maid, Agatha, who had dashed out of the kitchen like a rabbit smoked out of its hole and was making for the front door. No matter how I tried to explain it with details of multiple rape and murder, Agatha remained blissfully impervious to the peril of armed robbers surrounding us. She simply says yesmah and nosemah to everything you tell her and goes right ahead doing whatever she was doing before. 'Go back to the kitchen!' I thundered at her and with the same voice turned to the presence outside my door. I had been feeling somewhat more protected lately since I had all doors and windows in the flat reinforced with iron grills so that even if the fellow outside did manage to knock down the outer wooden door he would still have to face the iron, all of which gave you some time to plan your escape. Even so I stood well away from the front door with one eye on the kitchen exit and the fire-escape beyond it. 'Who is that?' I shouted. Whoever it was didn't seem to hear and continued ringing the alarm and banging on the door. Well, I wasn't going to budge either and continued screaming who? This went on literally for minutes and I was getting scared when he either heard me or else it occurred to him independently to use his voice instead of his fists. And I caught it in one of those brief spells when a storm pauses to take a deep breath. I unchained the iron grill and unlocked the door. 'It wasn't raining in my place,' he shouted sheepishly as he came in. 'I ran full tilt into it just there around the Secretariat. It was literally like barging into a pillar of rain, you know. You could stand there with the forward foot wet and the other dry.' 'Come on in. We'll go hoarse shouting out here.' He left his dripping umbrella with my potted plants on the landing and followed me into the parlour. Once inside, with door and window-louvres tightly shut, the noise of the rain receded dramatically to a distant background leaving us in muffled cosiness. 'When we were children,' Ikem said as he threw himself into the sofa and began to remove his wet shoes and tuck his socks inside them, 'August used to be a dry month. August Break we called it. The geography textbooks explained it, the farmer in the village expected it. The August Break never failed in those days.' 'Really?' 'What's happened to the days of my youth, BB?' 'Wasted, squandered, Ikem. Lost for ever, I'm afraid.' 'I hoped you would not say that. Not today. Oh, well.' 'What's wrong with today. Your birthday or something?' 'I have no birthdays. There was no registration of births and deaths in my village when I was born. Signed Notary Public.' I laughed and he joined me ... 'I wasn't one of your spoilt maternity births. I arrived on banana leaves behind the thatched house, not on white bed sheets ... Those are lovely flowers, what are they?' 'I have never known you to notice flowers or women's clothes and rubbish like that before. What's the matter.' 'I'm sorry, BB, that's a lovely dress. And lovely flowers, what are they?' 'Agatha is roasting corn and _ube__. Would you like some. Or with coconut if you prefer ...' 'I prefer both _ube__ and coconut.' 'Glutton!' 'That's right! Terminal stage when it attacks your grammar! You still haven't told me what these flowers are. I may not have noticed flowers before but I do now. It's never too late, is it?' 'No. It's called hydrangea.' As I went into the kitchen to open the store for Agatha to get a coconut out I kept asking myself what Ikem might be up to. Was it Chris? Had their relationship, dangerously bumpy in recent months, taken a nose-dive now for the crash? Ikem always avoided complaining about Chris to me. Was he going to break his own scrupulous practice for once? When I returned to the parlour he had lifted the vase of flowers to his nose and was sniffing it. I ate my corn with _ube__ and he his with _ube__ and coconut in alternate mouthfuls. Outside, the storm raged the way I like my storms--far away, its violent thunder and lightning distanced and muted as in a movie. I would have felt completely comfortable if Ikem had not been behaving a little strangely. Let's hope it's the storm, I prayed. Tropical storms can do so many different things to different creatures. That I have known from childhood. My older sister Alice always ran around the yard, if our father happened to be out, singing a childish rain song: ogwogwo mmili takumei ayolo! Finally exhausted she would come indoors shivering, eyes red and popping out, teeth clattering away and make for the kitchen fire. As for me whom she nicknamed salt, or less kindly Miss Goat, on account of my distaste for getting wet, my preference was to roll myself in a mat on the floor and inside my dark, cylindrical capsule play my silent game of modulating the storm's song by pressing my palms against my ears and taking them off, rhythmically. There was for me no greater luxury in those days than to sleep through night-rain on a Friday knowing there was neither school nor church in the morning to worry about. 'When you were little,' I asked Ikem, 'what did you do when it rained like this?' 'But I told you it never rained at all in August. We had a month of dry weather called the August Break.' 'OK! In July then, or September.' 'When I was really little I used to take off my scanty clothes and run into it.' 'Singing _ogwogwo mmili takumei ayolo__?' 'Did you sing to the rain too?' He fairly jumped with excitement. 'No, but my older sister did.' 'Oh ... what did _you__ do?' 'I listened. The rain sang to me.' 'Lucky girl! What did it say, the rain?' 'Uwa t'uwa t'uwa t'uwa; tooo ... waaa ... tooo ... waa Dooo--daaa ... Booo--baaa ... Shooo--shaaa ... Cooo--caaa ... Looo--laaa ... Mooo--maaa ...' 'Pooo--paaa,' said Ikem. 'Great song!' 'BB, you may be wondering why I am behaving so strangely today. Well, I've come on a mission the like of which I'd never undertaken before ... I've come to thank you for the greatest present one human being can give another. The gift of insight. That's what you gave me and I want to say thank you.' 'Insight? Me? Insight into what?' 'Into the world of women.' I held back a facetious comment trembling on my lip. Ikem's sudden change and extraordinary manner forbade its utterance. I held back and listened to this strange annunciation. 'You told me a couple of years ago, do you remember, that my thoughts were unclear and reactionary on the role of the modern woman in our society. Do you remember?' 'I do.' 'I resisted your charge ...' 'It wasn't a charge.' 'It damn well was! But I resisted. Vehemently. But the amazing thing was that the more I read your charge sheet ...' 'Oh my God!' '... the less impressive my plea became. My suspension from the _Gazette__ has done wonders for me. I have been able to sit and think things through. I now realize you were right and I was wrong.' 'Oh come on, Ikem. You know I detest all born-again people.' 'Don't be facetious!' 'I'm sorry. Go ahead. What happened?' 'Nothing happened. It simply dawned on me two mornings ago that a novelist must listen to his characters who after all are created to wear the shoe and point the writer where it pinches.' 'Now hold it! Are you suggesting I am a character in your novel?' 'BB, you've got to be serious, or I will leave. I mean it. I'm already losing my train of thought.' 'I won't breathe another word. Please go on.' 'One of the things you told me was that my attitude to women was too respectful.' 'I didn't.' 'You bloody well did. And you were damn right. You charged me with assigning to women the role of a fire-brigade after the house has caught fire and been virtually consumed. Your charge has forced me to sit down and contemplate the nature of oppression--how flexible it must learn to be, how many faces it must learn to wear if it is to succeed again and again.' He dug his hand into his shirt pocket and pulled out a folded sheet of paper and carefully unfolded it on his knee. 'I wrote this strange love-letter last night. May I read it?' I nodded. 'The original oppression of Woman was based on crude denigration. She caused Man to fall. So she became a scapegoat. No, not a scapegoat which might be blameless but a culprit richly deserving of whatever suffering Man chose thereafter to heap on her. That is Woman in the Book of Genesis. Out here, our ancestors, without the benefit of hearing about the Old Testament, made the very same story differing only in local colour. At first the Sky was very close to the Earth. But every evening Woman cut off a piece of the Sky to put in her soup pot or, as in another version, she repeatedly banged the top end of her pestle carelessly against the Sky whenever she pounded the millet or, as in yet another rendering--so prodigious is Man's inventiveness--she wiped her kitchen hands on the Sky's face. Whatever the detail of Woman's provocation, the Sky finally moved away in anger, and God with it. 'Well, that kind of candid chauvinism might be OK for the rugged taste of the Old Testament. The New Testament required a more enlightened, more refined, more loving even, strategy--ostensibly, that is. So the idea came to Man to turn his spouse into the very Mother of God, to pick her up from right under his foot where she'd been since Creation and carry her reverently to a nice, corner pedestal. Up there, her feet completely off the ground she will be just as irrelevant to the practical decisions of running the world as she was in her bad old days. The only difference is that now Man will suffer no guilt feelings; he can sit back and congratulate himself on his generosity and gentlemanliness. 'Meanwhile our ancestors out here, unaware of the New Testament, were working out independently a parallel subterfuge of their own. _Nneka__, they said. Mother is supreme. Let us keep her in reserve until the ultimate crisis arrives and the waist is broken and hung over the fire, and the palm bears its fruit at the tail of its leaf. Then, as the world crashes around Man's ears, Woman in her supremacy will descend and sweep the shards together. 'Do I make sense?' 'As always. Go on.' 'Thank you, BB. I owe that insight to you. I can't tell you what the new role for Woman will be. I don't know. I should never have presumed to know. _You__ have to tell us. We never asked you before. And perhaps because you've never been asked you may not have thought about it; you may not have the answer handy. But in that case everybody had better know who is _now__ holding up the action.' 'That's very kind of you!' 'That was the first part of this love-letter, the part I owe specifically to you. Here's the rest. 'The women are, of course, the biggest single group of oppressed people in the world and, if we are to believe the Book of Genesis, the very oldest. But they are not the only ones. There are others--rural peasants in every land, the urban poor in industrialized countries, Black people everywhere including their own continent, ethnic and religious minorities and castes in all countries. The most obvious practical difficulty is the magnitude and heterogeneity of the problem. There is no universal conglomerate of the oppressed. Free people may be alike everywhere in their freedom but the oppressed inhabit each their own peculiar hell. The present orthodoxies of deliverance are futile to the extent that they fail to recognize this. You know my stand on that. Every genuine artist feels it in his bone. The simplistic remedies touted by all manner of salesmen (including some who call themselves artists) will always fail because of man's stubborn antibody called surprise. Man will surprise by his capacity for nobility as well as for villainy. No system can change that. It is built into the core of man's free spirit. 'The sweeping, majestic visions of people rising victorious like a tidal wave against their oppressors and transforming their world with theories and slogans into a new heaven and a new earth of brotherhood, justice and freedom are at best grand illusions. The rising, conquering tide, yes; but the millennium afterwards, no! New oppressors will have been readying themselves secretly in the undertow long before the tidal wave got really going. 'Experience and intelligence warn us that man's progress in freedom will be piecemeal, slow and undramatic. Revolution may be necessary for taking a society out of an intractable stretch of quagmire but it does not confer freedom, and may indeed hinder it. 'Bloody reformist? That's a term of abuse it would be redundant to remind you I have had more than my fair share of invoking against others across the years. But I ask myself: beyond the pleasant glow that javelin of an epithet certainly brings to the heart of the righteous hurler what serious benefit can it offer to the solution of our problems? And I don't see any. 'Reform may be a dirty word then but it begins to look more and more like the most promising route to success in the real world. I limit myself to _most promising__ rather than _only__ for the simple reason that all certitude must now be suspect. 'Society is an extension of the individual. The most we can hope to do with a problematic individual psyche is to _re-form__ it. No responsible psychoanalyst would aim to do more, for to do more, to overthrow the psyche itself, would be to unleash insanity. No. We can only hope to rearrange some details in the periphery of the human personality. Any disturbance of its core is an irresponsible invitation to disaster. Even a one-day-old baby does not make itself available for your root-and-branch psychological engineering, for it comes trailing clouds of immortality. What immortality? Its baggage of irreducible inheritance of genes. That is immortality. 'It has to be the same with society. You re-form it around what it is, its core of reality; not around an intellectual abstraction. 'None of this is a valid excuse for political inactivity or apathy. Indeed to understand it is an absolute necessity for meaningful action, the knowledge of it being the only protective inoculation we can have against false hopes and virulent epidemics of gullibility. 'In the vocabulary of certain radical theorists contradictions are given the status of some deadly disease to which their opponents alone can succumb. But contradictions are the very stuff of life. If there had been a little dash of contradiction among the Gadarene swine some of them might have been saved from drowning. 'Contradictions if well understood and managed can spark off the fires of invention. Orthodoxy whether of the right or of the left is the graveyard of creativity. 'I didn't owe this insight to you, BB. I drank it in from my mother's breast. All I've ever needed since was confirmation. "Do I contradict myself?" asked Walt Whitman. "Very well, I contradict myself," he sang defiantly. "I am large, I contain multitudes." Every artist contains multitudes. Graham Greene is a Roman Catholic, a partisan of Rome, if you like. Why then does he write so compulsively about bad, doubtful and doubting priests? Because a genuine artist, no matter what he says he believes, must feel in his blood the ultimate enmity between art and orthodoxy. 'Those who would see no blot of villainy in the beloved oppressed nor grant the faintest glimmer of humanity to the hated oppressor are partisans, patriots and partyliners. In the grand finale of things there will be a mansion also for them where they will be received and lodged in comfort by the single-minded demigods of their devotion. But it will not be in the complex and paradoxical cavern of Mother Idoto.' He tossed the handwritten paper across to me, saying 'I must go,' and beginning to put his shoes back on. I stared at the paper, at the writing--elegant but at the same time, immensely powerful. He got up. I got up too and walked up to him. Impulsively he circled me in his embrace. I looked up at him and he began to kiss me. Everything inside me was dissolving; my knees were giving way under me; I was trembling violently and I seemed to be struggling for air. 'I think you better go,' I managed to say. He released me slowly and I sank into a chair. 'Yes, I'd better be going.' And he was gone, not for now as I and perhaps he too thought, but for ever. The storm had died down without our having been aware of it. All that was left of it now were tired twitches of intermittent lightning and the occasional, satiated hiccup of distant thunder. EIGHT _Daughters__ _IDEMILI__ THAT WE ARE SURROUNDED by deep mysteries is known to all but the incurably ignorant. But even they must concede the fact, indeed the inevitability, of the judiciously spaced, but nonetheless certain, interruptions in the flow of their high art to interject the word of their sponsor, the divinity that controls remotely but diligently the transactions of the marketplace that is their world. In the beginning Power rampaged through our world, naked. So the Almighty, looking at his creation through the round undying eye of the Sun, saw and pondered and finally decided to send his daughter, Idemili, to bear witness to the moral nature of authority by wrapping around Power's rude waist a loincloth of peace and modesty. She came down in the resplendent Pillar of Water, remembered now in legend only, but stumbled upon, some say, by the most fortunate in rare conditions of sunlight rarer even than the eighteen-year cycle of Odunke festivals and their richly arrayed celebrants leading garlanded cattle in procession through village pathways to sacrifice. It rises majestically from the bowl of the dark lake pushing itself upward and erect like the bole of the father of iroko trees its head commanding not the forest below but the very firmament of heaven. At first that holy lake was the sole shrine to Idemili. But as people multiplied and spread across the world they built little shrines farther and farther away from the lake wherever they found good land and water and settled. Still their numbers continued to increase and outstrip the provisions of every new settlement; and so the search for land and water also continued. As it happened, good land was more plentiful than good water and before long some hamlets too far from streams and springs were relieving their burning thirst with the juice of banana stems in the worst years of dry weather. Idemili, travelling through the country disguised as a hunter, saw this and on her return sent a stream from her lake to snake through the parched settlements all the way to Orimili, the great river which in generations to come strange foreigners would search out and rename the Niger. A deity who does as he says never lacks in worshippers. Idemili's devotees increased in all the country between Omambala and Iguedo. But how could they carry to the farthest limits of their dispersal adequate memories of the majesty of the Pillar of Water standing in the dark lake? Man's best artifice to snare and hold the grandeur of divinity always crumbles in his hands, and the more ardently he strives the more paltry and incongruous the result. So it were better he did not try at all; far better to ritualize that incongruity and by invoking the mystery of metaphor to hint at the most unattainable glory by its very opposite, the most mundane starkness--a mere stream, a tree, a stone, a mound of earth, a little clay bowl containing fingers of chalk. Thus it came about that the indescribable Pillar of Water fusing earth to heaven at the navel of the black lake became in numberless shrine-houses across the country, a dry stick rising erect from the bare, earth floor. It is to this emblem that a man who has achieved wealth of crop and livestock and now wishes to pin an eagle's feather on his success by buying admission into the powerful hierarchy of _ozo__ must go to present himself and offer sacrifices before he can begin the ceremonies, and again after he has concluded them. His first visit is no more than to inform the Daughter of the Almighty of his ambition. He is accompanied by his daughter or, if he has only sons, by the daughter of a kinsman; but a daughter it must be. This young woman must stand between him and the Daughter of the Almighty before he can be granted a hearing. She holds his hand like a child in front of the holy stick and counts seven. Then she arranges carefully on the floor seven fingers of chalk, fragile symbols of peace, and then gets him to sit on them so lightly that not one single finger may be broken. If all has gone well thus far he will then return to his compound and commence the elaborate and costly ceremonies of _ozo__ with feasting and dancing to the entire satisfaction of his community and their ancient custom. Then he must go back to the Daughter of the Almighty to let her know that he has now taken the high and sacred title of his people. Neither at the first audience nor at this second does Idemili deign to answer him directly. He must go away and await her sign and pleasure. If she finds him unworthy to carry the authority of _ozo__ she simply sends death to smite him and save her sacred hierarchy from contamination and scandal. If, however, she approves of him the only sign she condescends to give--grudgingly and by indirection--is that he will still be about after three years. Such is Idemili's contempt for man's unquenchable thirst to sit in authority on his fellows. The story goes that in the distant past a certain man handsome beyond compare but in randiness as unbridled as the odorous he-goat from the shrine of Udo planting his plenitude of seeds from a huge pod swinging between hind legs into she-goats tethered for him in front of numerous homesteads; this man, they said, finally desired also the _ozo__ title and took the word to Idemili. She said nothing. He went away, performed the rites, took the eagle feather and the titular name Nwakibie, and returned to tell her what he had done. Again she said nothing. Then as a final ritual he took shelter according to custom for twenty-eight days in a bachelor's hut away from his many wives. But though he lived there in the day for all to see he would steal away at dead of night through circuitous moon-swept paths to the hut of a certain widow he had fancied for some time; for as he was wont to ask in his more waggish days: why will a man mounting a widow listen for footsteps outside her hut when he knows how far her man has travelled? On his way to resume his hard-lying pretence at cock-crow one morning who should he behold stretched right across his path its head lost in the shrubbery to the left and its tail likewise to the right? None other than Eke-Idemili itself, royal python, messenger of the Daughter of God--the very one who carries not a drop of venom in its mouth and yet is held in greater awe than the deadliest of serpents! His circuitous way to the bachelor's hut thus barred, his feet obeying a power outside his will took him straight and true as an arrow to the consternation of his compound and his funeral. BEATRICE NWANYIBUIFE did not know these traditions and legends of her people because they played but little part in her upbringing. She was born as we have seen into a world apart; was baptized and sent to schools which made much about the English and the Jews and the Hindu and practically everybody else but hardly put in a word for her forebears and the divinities with whom they had evolved. So she came to barely knowing who she was. Barely, we say though, because she did carry a vague sense more acute at certain critical moments than others of being two different people. Her father had deplored the soldier-girl who fell out of trees. Chris saw the quiet demure damsel whose still waters nonetheless could conceal deep overpowering eddies of passion that always almost sucked him into fatal depths. Perhaps Ikem alone came close to sensing the village priestess who will prophesy when her divinity rides her abandoning if need be her souppot on the fire, but returning again when the god departs to the domesticity of kitchen or the bargaining market-stool behind her little display of peppers and dry fish and green vegetables. He knew it better than Beatrice herself. But knowing or not knowing does not save us from being known and even recruited and put to work. For, as a newly-minted proverb among her people has it, baptism (translated in their language as Water of God) is no antidote against possession by Agwu the capricious god of diviners and artists. _NWANYIBUIFE__ WHEN SHE WAS MARCHED through the ranks of her erstwhile party comrades like a disgraced soldier just cashiered at a court-martial, his epaulette ripped off with his insignia of rank, she was strangely lucid. The soft voice conveying the news of the car waiting below had done it. Her sense of danger had been stabbed into hypersensitivity by the menace of that voice--quiet as before but flashing ever so briefly that glint of metal. Aha! This was the man who, as rumour has it, returned from an intensive course in a Latin American army and invented the simplest of tortures for preliminary interrogations. No messy or cumbersome machinery but a tiny piece of office equipment anyone could pick up in a stationery store and put in his pocket--a paper-stapler in short, preferably the Samsonite brand. Just place the hand where the paper should be--palm up or down doesn't really matter--and bang. The truth jumps out surprisingly fast, even from the hardest of cases. This extended image flashed through Beatrice's mind in its completeness and in one instant. When she walked through the room behind the major she was likewise able to take in as if by some unseen radar revolving atop her head every detail of the scene. His Excellency was the only party missing from this still life. All the figures, except one, stared at her silently and uninhibitedly from whatever standing or sitting position they were in, the American girl's eyeballs in particular popping out of her head like the eyeballs of a violent idol. One man alone kept his gaze to the carpet on which he sat and seemed to doodle with his finger--Alhaji Mahmoud, Chairman of the Kangan/American Chamber of Commerce. He was the only person at the party just ended with whom Beatrice had not exchanged a single word that evening beyond a lukewarm hello at the introductions. It was the same car, the same driver, the same escort. The two had jumped out to salute the Major as he brought their passenger down, opened the door of the car for her himself, slammed it shut after her and walked away without a word. Naturally the journey back was silent. Which suited her perfectly. The sharp prick of physical anxiety caused by that glint of metal hidden inside the Major's velvet voice had passed quickly taking also with it the envelopment of utter desolation which had preceded it and which it had so effectively punctured. What passed through her mind and flowed through her senses during the midnight journey could not be assigned a simple name. It was more complex than the succession of hot and cold flushes of malaria. Indignation, humiliation, outrage, sorrow, pity, anger, vindictiveness and other less identifiable emotions swept back and forth through her like successions of waves coming in, hitting shallow bottom of shoreline, exploding in white froth and flowing back a little tired, somewhat assuaged. By rights she should not have slept that night. But she did; and a deep and plumbless sleep it proved to be. She tumbled into it without preparation from the brink of wakefulness, in full dress. And her waking up was just as precipitate. One instant she was virtually unconscious and the next she was totally awake, her eyes and head absolutely clear. She was tranquil almost. Why? From what source? Last night now seemed far away, like something remembered from a long and turbulent dream. Last night? It wasn't last night. It was the same night, this night. It was still Saturday night stroke Sunday morning. And it wasn't light yet. She heard far away the crowing of a cock. Strange. She had not before heard a cock crow in this Government Reserved Area. Surely nobody here has been reduced to keeping poultry like common villagers. Perhaps some cook or steward or gardener had knocked together an illegal structure outside his room in the Boys' Quarters for a chicken-house. The British when they were here would not have stood for it. They had totally and completely ruled out the keeping of domestic animals in their reservation. Except dogs, of course. That habit, strange to say, has survived but not for the reasons the British established it. You wouldn't see any of their black successors walking his dog today but you will find affixed to the iron grill or barbed wire gate a stern warning: BEWARE OF DOG, sometimes embellished with the likeness of an Alsatian or German Shepherd's head with a flaming red tongue. Unfortunately armed robbers of Kangan do not stop at kicking dogs; they shoot them. Lying in bed clear-eyed and listening to the sounds of morning was a new experience for Beatrice. As the faint light of dawn began timidly to peer through gaps in window blinds and the high fan-light of her bedroom she heard with a sudden pang of exultation the song of a bird she had heard so often in the mission compound of her childhood but not, as far as she could tell, ever since; certainly never before in Bassa. She immediately sat up in her bed. The bird, her mother had told her, was the chief servant of the king and every morning he asks the guards of the treasury: _Is the king's property correct? ... Is the king's property correct? ... The king's property ... The king's property ... Is the king's property correct?__ She got up, went into the living-room, picked up the frontdoor keys from the sideboard and unlocked the grill and the door and went out into her narrow balcony. Standing there among her potted plants she took in deep lungfuls of luxuriously cool, fresh morning air and watched streaks of light brightening slowly in the eastern sky. And then he spoke again, the diligent chamberlain: _Is the king's property correct?__ And now she saw him against the light--a little dark-brownish fellow with a creamy belly and the faintest suggestion of a ceremonial plume on the crown of his head. He was perched on the taller of the two pine trees standing guard at the driveway into the block of flats. Beatrice had never until now shown the slightest interest in birds and beyond vultures and cattle egrets hardly knew any of them by name. Now she was so taken with this conscientious palace official that she decided to find out his name as soon as possible. She knew there was an illustrated book called something like _The Common Birds of West Africa__... Again he demanded: _The king's property ... The king's property ... Is the king's property correct?__ Strange, but tears loomed suddenly in Beatrice's eyes as she spoke to the bird: 'Poor fellow. You have not heard the news? The king's treasury was broken into last night and all his property carried away--his crown, his sceptre and all.' As she scanned the pine trees in the rapidly brightening light she saw that the caretaker of the crown jewels was not alone. There were literally scores of other birds hopping about the twigs preening themselves and making low trilling noises or short, sharp calls of satisfaction. He continued intermittently to make his strong-voiced inquiry until the sun had come up and then, as on a signal, the birds began to fly away in ones and twos and larger groups. Soon the tree was empty. These birds, she thought, did not just arrive here this morning. Here, quite clearly, is where they have always slept. Why have I not noticed them before? Even her poor mother terrorized as she was by her woman's lot could fabricate from immemorial birdsong this tale of an African bird waking up his new world in words of English. A powerful flush of remembering now swept through her mind like a gust of wind and she recalled perfectly every circumstance of the story. Alas, her mother had only told, not invented it. The credit must go to a certain carpenter/comedian who played the accordion at village christian wakes and performed such tricks as lifting a table between his teeth to chase away sleep from the eyes of mourners and relieve the tedium of hymns and pious testimonies. Beatrice smiled wryly. So, two whole generations before the likes of me could take a first class degree in English, there were already barely literate carpenters and artisans of British rule hacking away in the archetypal jungle and subverting the very sounds and legends of daybreak to make straight my way. And my father--wonders shall never end as he would say--was he then also among these early morning road-makers-into-the-jungle-of-tongues? What an improbable thought! And yet all those resounding maxims he wielded like the hefty strokes of an axe-man. _Cleanliness is next to godliness! Punctuality is the soul of business!__ (A prelude this, she recalled with a smile now, to the flogging of late-comers to school on rainy mornings). And then that gem of them all, his real favourite: _Procrastination is a lazy man's apology!__ A maxim of mixed mintage, that; half-caste first-fruits of a heady misalliance. Or, as Ikem would have said, missionary mishmash! She thawed fast and unexpectedly to the memory of this man who was her father and yet a total stranger, like the bird who lived and sang in her tree unknown to her till now. She was still at the railing of her balcony when Agatha came in to begin her chores. 'No breakfast for me Agatha,' she called out cheerily to her. 'But, make me a nice cup of coffee, please.' She drank it at the same spot where she had taken her position at dawn. A lizard red in head and tail, blue in trunk chased a drab-grey female furiously, as male lizards always seem to do, across the paved driveway. She darted through the hedges as though her life depended on it. Unruffled he took a position of high visibility at the centre of the compound and began to do his endless press-ups no doubt to impress upon the coy female, wherever she might be hiding in the shrubbery, the fact of his physical stamina. At last she left the balcony and went indoors for a cold shower and then changed into a long, loose dress of blue _adire__ embroidered in elaborate white patterns at the neck, chest, sleeves and hem. As she looked at herself in her bedroom mirror and liked what she saw, she thought: We can safely leave grey drabness in female attire to the family of lizards and visiting American journalists. The case of the lizard is probably quite understandable. With the ferocious sexuality of her man she must need all the drabness she can muster for a shield. She ate a grapefruit and drank a second cup of coffee while she flipped through the barren pages of the Sunday newspapers much of it full-page portrait obituaries even of grandfathers who had died fifty years ago but apparently still remembered every passing minute by their devoted descendants. And, wedged between memories of the living dead, equally fulsome portraiture of the still living who have 'made it' in wealth or title or simply years. And once in a while among these dead-alive celebrities a disclaimer of someone newly disreputable, inserted by his former employer or partner using naturally a photograph of the unflattering quality of a police WANTED poster. She tossed the papers away irritably wondering why one must keep on buying and trying to read such trash. Except that if you didn't you couldn't avoid the feeling that you might be missing something important, few of us, alas having the strength of will to resist that false feeling. She got up and put Onyeka Onwenu's 'One Love' on the stereo and returned to the sofa, threw her head on the back-rest and shut her eyes. As the morning wore on she seemed to become less and less composed. She looked at her watch frequently. Once, after she had changed a record she picked up the telephone, heard the dialling tone and replaced. When finally it rang she looked at her watch again. It was eleven exactly. She let the telephone ring five or six times and might have left it longer had Agatha not rushed in from the kitchen to answer it. It was who she thought it was. Chris. 'So you are back,' he joked. 'Yes, I am back,' she answered. 'Anything the matter?' 'Like what?' 'Are you all right, BB?' 'Why, of course. Do I sound as if I might not be all right?' 'Yes, you do ... Are you alone?' 'What do you mean?' 'Look, I'm coming over. See you.' Twenty minutes later his car pulled up outside. Beatrice went not to the front door but to the kitchen door first, opened it and told Agatha that she was expecting someone and did not wish to be disturbed when he came up. Agatha's saucy and suggestive look at this news led Beatrice to lock the kitchen door altogether. Then she went to answer the doorbell. Chris decided to take the bull by the horn. As soon as he was let in he asked how the party went. 'Party? But that was last night.' 'Yes, it was last night. And I am asking how did it go?' 'It went all right.' They were both seated now, she on the sofa, he on a chair across the low centre table standing on a brown circular rug. They sat staring at each other for minutes, if not hours. Chris was completely at a loss. He had never had to cope with BB in such a mood and was quite unprepared. At last he got up, walked a few steps and stopped in front of her. 'Will you be good enough, BB, to tell me in what way I have now offended you.' 'Offended me? Who said you offended me?' 'Then why are you behaving so strange.' 'I am not behaving strange. You are! Chris, you are behaving very strange indeed. Listen, let me ask you a simple question, Chris. I am the girl you say you want to marry. Right? OK, I am taken away in strange, very strange circumstances last night. I call you beforehand and tell you. You come over here and all you say to me is: don't worry, it's all right.' 'I never said anything of the sort to you.' 'Chris, you asked me, the girl you want to marry, to travel forty miles at night to Abichi ...' 'To Abichi? You didn't say it was Abichi, did you?' 'That's not the point. You asked the girl you want to marry to go along and keep all options open. Do you remember that? Well, I'm sorry to inform you I did not take your advice.' 'You are being ...' 'Please, don't interrupt. I go off forty miles to this weird party.' 'BB, you never told me it was to Abichi.' 'Please, let me finish. I am carried off to this strange place and my future husband retires to his bed, sleeps well, wakes up, listens to the BBC at seven, has his bath, eats his breakfast and sits down afterwards to read the papers. Perhaps even take a walk in the garden. It is still only nine o'clock, so perhaps you go to your study and attend to some work you brought home. And then, finally at midday you remember the girl you asked to keep all the options open. You pick up the phone and tell her oh, you're back!' 'I didn't want to call earlier if that's what you are complaining about ...' 'I am not complaining about anything. You didn't want to call earlier. Exactly. You didn't! You know why you didn't? Because you didn't want to find out if I slept in Abichi with your boss.' 'What the hell are you talking about?' 'You didn't want to catch me out. Why? Because you are a very reasonable man, Chris. You are a very considerate man. You wouldn't hurt a fly. Well, I have bad news for you. You are damn too reasonable for this girl. I want a man who cares, not a man ...' 'BB, you are out of your mind!' 'She wants a man who cares enough to be curious about where his girl sleeps. That's the kind of man this girl wants.' 'Well, well!' 'Well, well. Yes, well, well. And about time.' 'Listen BB.' (He took the remaining steps and made to place a hand on her shoulder.) 'Take your hand off me,' she screamed. 'Don't bark at me, BB.' 'I'm not barking.' 'You are. I don't know what has come over you. Screaming at me like some Cherubim and Seraphim prophetess or something. What's the matter? I don't understand.' He stood there where the hand he had tried to place on her shoulder had been rebuffed, and gazed down at her. She had now folded her arms across her breast and bent her head forward on her chest as if in silent prayer. Neither of them moved again or spoke for a very long time. Then Chris noticed the slightest heaving of her chest and shoulders and went and sat down on the sofa beside her and placed his left arm across her shoulder and with his right hand raised her chin gently and saw she was crying. She did not resist then as he pulled her to him and reverently tasted the salt of her tears. As their struggle intensified to get inside each other, to melt and lose their separateness on that cramping sofa, she whispered, her breathing coming fast and urgent: 'Let's go inside. It's too uncomfortable here.' And they fairly scrambled out of the sofa into the bedroom and peeled off their garments and cast them away like things on fire, and fell in together into the wide, open space of her bed and began to roll over and over until she could roll no more and said: 'Come in.' And as he did she uttered a strangled cry that was not just a cry but also a command or a password into her temple. From there she took charge of him leading him by the hand silently through heaving groves mottled in subdued yellow sunlight, treading dry leaves underfoot till they came to streams of clear blue water. More than once he had slipped on the steep banks and she had pulled him up and back with such power and authority as he had never seen her exercise before. Clearly this was her grove and these her own peculiar rites over which she held absolute power. Priestess or goddess herself? No matter. But would he be found worthy? Would he survive? This unending, excruciating joyfulness in the crossroads of laughter and tears. Yes, I must, oh yes I must, yes, oh yes, yes, oh yes. I must, must, must. Oh holy priestess, hold me now. I am slipping, slipping, slipping. And now he was not just slipping but falling, crumbling into himself. Just as he was going to plead for mercy she screamed an order: 'OK!' and he exploded into stars and floated through fluffy white clouds and began a long and slow and weightless falling and sinking into deep, blue sleep. When he woke like a child cradled in her arms and breasts her eyes watching anxiously over him, he asked languorously if she slept. 'Priestesses don't sleep.' He kissed her lips and her nipples and closed his eyes again. 'YOU CALLED ME a priestess. No, a prophetess, I think. I mind only the Cherubim and Seraphim part of it. As a matter of fact I do sometimes feel like Chielo in the novel, the priestess and prophetess of the Hills and the Caves.' 'It comes and goes, I imagine.' 'Yes. It's on now. And I see trouble building up for us. It will get to Ikem first. No joking, Chris. He will be the precursor to make straight the way. But after him it will be you. We are all in it, Ikem, you, me and even Him. The thing is no longer a joke. As my father used to say, it is no longer a dance you can dance carrying your snuff in one cupped hand. You and Ikem must quickly patch up this ridiculous thing between you that nobody has ever been able to explain to me.' 'BB, I can't talk to Ikem any more. I am tired. And drained of all stamina,' 'No, Chris. You have more stamina than you think.' 'Well, I certainly seem to. But only under your management, you know.' He smiled mischievously and kissed her. 'You know I am not talking about that, stupid.' She left him in bed, had a quick shower, came back and only then retrieved her dress where she had flung it and put it back on. All the while Chris's eyes were glued on her flawless body and she knew it. She next retrieved Chris's things and stacked them neatly at the foot of the bed. Then she left the room to find out about lunch. Agatha seething with resentment was seated on the kitchen chair, her head on the table, pretending to be asleep. Yes, she had finished lunch she answered while her narrowed, righteous eyes added something like: while you were busy in your sinfulness. Beatrice prepared a plate of green salad to augment the brown beans with fried plantain and beef stew. Agatha had not bothered to make any dessert no doubt expecting to have the pleasure of hearing her mistress's complaint. Beatrice simply ignored her and quickly put together from cakes and odds and ends in the fridge two little bowls of sherry trifles. Then she went back to the room and woke Chris up. It would appear from the way she beamed at him when he appeared at the table that Agatha did not include him in her moral censure. Girls at war! thought Beatrice with a private smile which the other apparently noticed and answered with a swift frown. Even Chris noticed the sudden switch. 'What's eating your maid?' he asked as soon as she had returned to the kitchen. 'Nothing. She is all smiles to you.' 'Familiarity breeding contempt, then?' 'No, more than that. She is a prophetess of Jehovah.' 'And you are of the House of Baal.' 'Exactly. Or worse, of the unknown god.' OVER LUNCH she told him about last night at Abichi. Or as much as it was possible to tell. Chris took in the introductory details warily knowing that the gaiety in her voice was hiding something awful. When she finally let it out he was so outraged he involuntarily jumped up from his seat. 'Please sit down and eat your food.' He sat down but not to eat. Not another morsel. 'I can't believe that,' he kept saying. Beatrice's efforts to get him to resume his lunch failed totally. He had gently pushed his plate away. 'Look, Chris, this salad is not Agatha's. _I__ made it specially for _you__.' He relented somewhat and shovelled two or three spoonfuls of vegetables into his mouth and set the spoon down again. Finally she gave up, saying she should have known better and not shot her stupid mouth till he had eaten. She called Agatha and asked her to put the dessert back in the fridge and bring them coffee things. Without answering, she began instead to clear the table. 'Agatha!' 'Madam!' 'Leave the table alone and get us coffee, please. After that you can clear the table.' 'Yes, madam.' 'Let's go and sit more comfortably,' she said to Chris. 'We will have coffee and brandy. I insist on that. I want a little celebration. Don't ask me for what. A celebration, that's all. _Kabisa!__' SLOWLY, VERY SLOWLY under Beatrice's expert resuscitation his spirits began to rally. She dwelt on the amusing trivia as much as possible and underplayed the shocks. But most masterly of all she got Chris to actively participate in recreating the events. 'Who is that Alhaji fellow, Chairman, I think, of the Kangan/American Chamber of Commerce?' she asked. 'Oh that one. Alhaji Abdul Mahmoud. Didn't you know him? I thought you did. You see, that's the trouble with being such a recluse. If you came out to even one cocktail party a month you would know what was going on ... Alhaji Mahmoud is himself a bit of a hermit though. He hardly appears anywhere and when he does, hardly says a word. Rumour has it that he has in the last one year knocked all other Kangan millionaires into a cocked hat. Eight ocean liners, they say, two or three private jets; a private jetty (no pun intended). No customs officials go near his jetty and so, say rumour-mongers, he is the prince of smugglers. What else? Fifty odd companies, including a bank. Monopoly of government fertilizer imports. That's about it. Very quiet, even self-effacing but they say absolutely ruthless. All that may or may not be standard fare for multi-millionaires. What I find worrying and I don't think I can quite believe it yet is that (voice lowered) he may be fronting you know for ... your host.' 'No!' 'Don't quote me. Rumours rumours rumours. I should know though. After all I am the Commissioner for Information, aren't I? But I'm afraid I have very little information myself ... Incidentally BB, how can you be so wicked? Imagine confronting me with that embarrassing catalogue of my morning's activities including the BBC at seven! Absolutely wicked ... But I suppose it could have been worse. You might have added, for instance, that while the ministry over which I preside dishes out all that flim-flam to the nation on KBC I sneak away every morning when no one is watching to listen to the Voice of the Enemy.' 'That was a good performance of mine, was it?' 'Absolutely flawless. And devastating. I don't know why you still haven't written a play. You would knock Ikem into a cocked hat.' 'That would take some doing. But thanks all the same.' Before he finally left her flat a little after six she had made another passionate plea to get him to agree to patch things up with Ikem. 'What I heard and saw last night frightened me. Ikem was being tried there in absentia and convicted. You have to save him, Chris. I know how difficult he is and everything. Believe me, I do. But you simply have to cut through all that. Ikem has no other friend and no sense of danger. Or rather he has but doesn't know how to respond. You've tried everything in the book, I know. But you've just got to try them all over again. That's what friends are for. There is very little time, Chris.' 'Little? There may be _no__ time at all left ... I should do something; I agree, but what? You see there is nothing concrete on which Ikem and I quarrel. What divides us is style not substance. And that is absolutely unbridgeable. Strange isn't it?' 'Very strange.' 'And yet ... on reflection ... not so strange. You see, if you and I have a quarrel over an orange we could settle it by dividing the orange or by letting either of us have it, or by handing it over to a third party or even by throwing it away. But supposing our quarrel is that I happen to love oranges and you happen to hate them, how do you settle that? You will always hate oranges and I will always love them; we can't help it.' 'We could decide though, couldn't we, that it was silly and futile to quarrel over our likes and dislikes.' 'Yes,' he answered eagerly. 'As long as we are not fanatical. If either of us is a fanatic then there can be no hope of a settlement. We will disagree as long as we live. The mere prospect of _that__ is what leaves me emotionally drained and even paralysed ... Why am I still in this Cabinet? Ikem calls us a circus show, and he is largely right. We are not a Cabinet. The real Cabinet are some of those clowns you saw last night. Why am I still there then? Honour and all that demands that I turn in my paper of resignation. But can I?' 'Yes, you can.' 'Well, I've just told you I have no energy to do it.' 'Nonsense!' 'And even if I were to make one hell of an effort and turn in my paper today, what do I do after that? Go into exile and drink a lot of booze in European capitals and sleep with a lot of white girls after delivering revolutionary lectures to admiring audiences seven worlds away from where my problem is. BB, I have seen that option; I have considered it and believe me it's far less attractive than this charade here.' 'So?' 'So I will stay put. And do you know something else; it may not be easy to leave even if I wanted. Do you remember what he said during that terrifying debate over his life presidency? I told you, didn't I? For one brief moment he shed his pretended calmness and threatened me: If anyone thinks he can leave the Cabinet on this issue he will be making a sad mistake.' 'Anyone walking out of that door will not go home but head straight into detention. Yes I remember that. So?' 'I am not saying that such a ridiculous threat is what is keeping me at my post. I mention it only to show how tricky things can become of a sudden. That's why I have said a hundred million times to Ikem: Lie low for a while and this gathering tornado may rage and pass overhead carrying away roof-tops and perhaps ... only perhaps ... leave us battered but alive. But oh no! Ikem is outraged that I should recommend such cowardly and totally unworthy behaviour to him. You yourself have been witness to it again and again. And you are now asking me to go yet again and go on my knees and ask an artist who has the example of Don Quixote and other fictional characters to guide him ...' 'Oh, that's not fair, Chris. That's most unfair. Ikem is as down to the ground, in his way, as either of us. Perhaps, more so ... You only have to compare his string of earthy girlfriends to yours truly ...' Having said it Beatrice immediately regretted her indulgence. She should have resisted the temptation of a soft diversionary remark. Power escaped through it leaving her passionate purpose suddenly limp ... They talked on desultorily for a little while longer and then parted without denting the problem. Chris merely restated his position before leaving. 'You are asking a man who has long despaired of fighting to hold back a combatant, fanatical and in full gear. My dear, all he'll ever get for his pains is to be knocked flat on his face.' NINE _Views of Struggle__ IKEM'S DRIVE that hot afternoon was not in answer to Chris's instruction to send a reporter to the Presidential Palace. A reporter was indeed sent and he must have duly reported. Ikem went for reasons of his own, in search of personal enlightenment. He arrived on the grounds of the Palace just as the party was breaking up. So he could do no more for the present than exchange courtesies with the white-bearded leader of the Abazon delegation and arrange a later meeting with him and his group at the hotel where they were lodged. Harmoney Hotel is a sleazy establishment in the northern slums of the capital and, judging by the ease with which Ikem's inquiry led him to it, a popular resort in the neighbourhood. It is the kind of place that would boast a certain number of resident prostitutes; a couple of rooms used by three or four young men of irregular hours and unspecified occupation who sleep mostly by day; and a large turnover of small-time traders from up-country visiting Bassa periodically to replenish their stock of retail goods. It is busy and homely in a peculiar kind of way. Ikem had already discovered at the Presidential Palace that the delegation was not five hundred strong as he had been told but a mere six, and that the large crowd that had accompanied it to the Palace were Abazon indigenes in Bassa: motor mechanics, retail traders, tailors, vulcanizers, taxi-and bus-drivers who had loaned their vehicles, and others doing all kinds of odd jobs or nothing at all in the city. A truly motley crowd! No wonder His Excellency was reported to have received the news of their sudden arrival on his doorstep with considerable apprehension. I would too if I were in his shoes, admitted Ikem mischievously to himself. They were seated around five or six tables joined together in the open courtyard of the hotel, not five hundred of them now, but perhaps twenty, drinking and discussing excitedly their visit to the Palace. As soon as they saw Ikem enter from the street through the main iron gate into the roughly cemented courtyard everybody got up including the six visiting elders and received him with something approaching an ovation. He shook hands all round and was looking for a vacant seat when someone, a kind of master of ceremonies, indicated a vacated place of honour for him beside the white-bearded elder. Then he shouted 'Service!' very importantly and when a slouching waiter in a dirty blue tunic appeared, ordered six bottles of beer and three more roast chicken. 'Quick, quick,' he said. Then he surveyed the assembled group, picked up an empty beer bottle and knocked its bottom on the table for silence: 'Our people say that when a titled man comes into a meeting the talking must have to stop until he has taken his seat. An important somebody has just come in who needs no introduction. Still yet, we have to do things according to what Europeans call protocol. I call upon our distinguished son and Editor of the _National Gazette__ to stand up.' Ikem rose to a second tremendous ovation. 'When you hear Ikem Osodi Ikem Osodi everywhere you think his head will be touching the ceiling. But look at him, how simple he is. I am even taller than himself, a dunce like me. Our people say that an animal whose name is famous does not always fill a hunter's basket.' At this point Ikem interjected that he expected more people to beat him up now that his real size was known, and caused much laughter. But in spite of the drinking and eating and the jolly laughter the speaker was still able to register his disappointment that this most famous son of Abazon had not found it possible to join in their monthly meetings and other social gatherings so as to direct their ignorant fumblings with his wide knowledge. He went on with this failing at such length and relentlessness that the bearded old man finally stopped him by rising to his feet. He was tall, gaunt-looking and with a slight stoop of the shoulders. The shrillness in the other man's voice was totally absent here but the power of his utterance held everyone captive from his very first words. He began by thanking Abazon people in Bassa for receiving him and the other five leaders from home. He thanked the many young men a few only of whom were now present for turning out in their hundreds to accompany the delegation to the Palace and showing Bassa that Abazon had people. Then he turned sharply to the complaint of the last speaker: 'I have heard what you said about this young man, Osodi, whose doings are known everywhere and fill our hearts with pride. Going to meetings and weddings and naming ceremonies of one's people is good. But don't forget that our wise men have said also that a man who answers every summons by the town-crier will not plant corn in his fields. So my advice to you is this. Go on with your meetings and marriages and naming ceremonies because it is good to do so. But leave this young man alone to do what he is doing for Abazon and for the whole of Kangan; the cock that crows in the morning belongs to one household but his voice is the property of the neighbourhood. You should be proud that this bright cockerel that wakes the whole village comes from your compound.' There was such compelling power and magic in his voice that even the MC who had voiced the complaints was now beginning to nod his head, like everybody else, in agreement. 'If your brother needs to journey far across the Great River to find what sustains his stomach, do not ask him to sit at home with layabouts scratching their bottom and smelling the finger. I never met this young man before this afternoon when he came looking for us at the compound of the Big Chief. I had never met him before; I have never read what they say he writes because I do not know ABC. But I have heard of all the fight he has fought for poor people in this land. I would not like to hear that he has given up that fight because he wants to attend the naming ceremony of Okeke's son and Mgbafo's daughter. 'Let me ask a question. How do we salute our fellows when we come in and see them massed in assembly so huge we cannot hope to greet them one by one, to call each man by his title? Do we not say: To everyone his due? Have you thought what a wise practice our fathers fashioned out of those simple words? To every man his own! To each his chosen title! We can all see how that handful of words can save us from the ache of four hundred handshakes and the headache of remembering a like multitude of praisenames. But it does not end there. It is saying to us: Every man has what is his; do not bypass him to enter his compound ... 'It is also like this (for what is true comes in different robes) ... Long before sunrise in the planting or harvesting season; at that time when sleep binds us with a sweetness more than honey itself the bush-fowl will suddenly startle the farmer with her scream: o-o-i! o-o-i! o-o-i! in the stillness and chill of the grassland. I ask you, does the farmer jump up at once with heavy eyes and prepare for the fields or does he scream back to the bush-fowl: _Shut up! Who told you the time? You have never hoed a cassava ridge in your life nor planted one seed of millet.__ No! If he is a farmer who means to prosper he will not challenge the bush-fowl; he will not dispute her battle-cry; he will get up and obey. 'Have you thought about that? I tell you it is the way the Almighty has divided the work of the world. Everyone and his own! The bush-fowl, her work; and the farmer, his. 'To some of us the Owner of the World has apportioned the gift to tell their fellows that the time to get up has finally come. To others He gives the eagerness to rise when they hear the call; to rise with racing blood and put on their garbs of war and go to the boundary of their town to engage the invading enemy boldly in battle. And then there are those others whose part is to wait and when the struggle is ended, to take over and recount its story. 'The sounding of the battle-drum is important; the fierce waging of the war itself is important; and the telling of the story afterwards--each is important in its own way. I tell you there is not one of them we could do without. But if you ask me which of them takes the eagle-feather I will say boldly: the story. Do you hear me? Now, when I was younger, if you had asked me the same question I would have replied without a pause: the battle. But age gives to a man some things with the right hand even as it takes away others with the left. The torrent of an old man's water may no longer smash into the bole of the roadside tree a full stride away as it once did but fall around his feet like a woman's; but in return the eye of his mind is given wing to fly away beyond the familiar sights of the homestead ... 'So why do I say that the story is chief among his fellows? The same reason I think that our people sometimes will give the name Nkolika to their daughters-Recalling-Is-Greatest. Why? Because it is only the story can continue beyond the war and the warrior. It is the story that outlives the sound of war-drums and the exploits of brave fighters. It is the story, not the others, that saves our progeny from blundering like blind beggars into the spikes of the cactus fence. The story is our escort; without it, we are blind. Does the blind man own his escort? No, neither do we the story; rather it is the story that owns us and directs us. It is the thing that makes us different from cattle; it is the mark on the face that sets one people apart from their neighbours.' _The footfalls of waiters padding about the cemented courtyard rose to a new prominence in the profound silence.__ 'So the arrogant fool who sits astride the story as though it were a bowl of foo-foo set before him by his wife understands little about the world. The story will roll him into a ball, dip him in the soup and swallow him first. I tell you he is like the puppy who swings himself around and farts into a blazing fire with the aim to put it out. Can he? No, the story is everlasting ... Like fire, when it is not blazing it is smouldering under its own ashes or sleeping and resting inside its flint-house. 'When we are young and without experience we all imagine that the story of the land is easy, that every one of us can get up and tell it. But that is not so. True, we all have our little scraps of tale bubbling in us. But what we tell is like the middle of a mighty boa which a foolish forester mistakes for a tree trunk and settles upon to take his snuff ... Yes, we lay into our little tale with wild eyes and a vigorous tongue. Then, one day Agwu comes along and knocks it out of our mouth and our jaw out of shape for our audacity and hands over the story to a man of his choice ... Agwu does not call a meeting to choose his seers and diviners and artists; Agwu, the god of healers; Agwu, brother to Madness! But though born from the same womb he and Madness were not created by the same _chi__. Agwu is the right hand a man extends to his fellows; Madness, the forbidden hand. Madness unleashes and rides his man roughly into the wild savannah. Agwu possesses his own just as securely but has him corralled to serve the compound. Agwu picks his disciple, rings his eye with white chalk and dips his tongue, willing or not, in the brew of prophecy; and right away the man will speak and put head and tail back to the severed trunk of our tale. This miracle-man will amaze us because he may be a fellow of little account, not the bold warrior we all expect nor even the war-drummer. But in his new-found utterance our struggle will stand reincarnated before us. He is the liar who can sit under his thatch and see the moon hanging in the sky outside. Without stirring from his stool he can tell you how commodities are selling in a distant marketplace. His chalked eye will see every blow in a battle he never fought. So fully is he owned by the telling that sometimes--especially when he looks around him and finds no age-mate to challenge the claim--he will turn the marks left on him by the chicken-pox and yaws he suffered in childhood into bullet scars ... yes, scars from that day _our men__ pounded _their men__ like palm-fruit in the heavy mortar of iroko!' _The tense air was broken suddenly by loud laughter. The old man himself smiled with benign mischief.__ 'But the lies of those possessed by Agwu are lies that do no harm to anyone. They float on the top of story like the white bubbling at the pot-mouth of new palm-wine. The true juice of the tree lies coiled up inside, waiting to strike ... 'I don't know why my tongue is crackling away tonight like a clay-bowl of _ukwa__ seeds toasting over the fire; why I feel like a man who has been helped to lower a heavy load from off his head; and he straightens his neck again and shakes the ache from it. Yes, my children, I feel light-headed like one who has completed all his tasks and is gay and free to go. But I don't want to leave thinking that any of you is being pushed away from his proper work, from the work his creator arranged with him before he set out for the world ...' _He stopped speaking. The silence was so complete that one could hear him gnashing his teeth. Ikem realized that other people, habitus of the Harmoney Hotel, drinking their beer at single tables in different parts of the courtyard, had also fallen under this old man's spell and now had their eyes trained on him.__ 'When we were told two years ago that we should vote for the Big Chief to rule for ever and all kinds of people we had never seen before came running in and out of our villages asking us to say yes I told my people: We have Osodi in Bassa. If he comes home and tells us that we should say yes we will do so because he is there as our eye and ear. I said: if what these strange people are telling us is true, Osodi will come or he will write in his paper and our sons will read it and know that it is true. But he did not come to tell us and he did not write it in his paper. So we knew that cunning had entered that talk. 'There was another thing that showed me there was deception in the talk. The people who were running in and out and telling us to say yes came one day and told us that the Big Chief himself did not want to rule for ever but that he was being forced. Who is forcing him? I asked. The people, they replied. That means us? I asked, and their eyes shifted from side to side. And I knew finally that cunning had entered the matter. And I thanked them and they left. I called my people and said to them: The Big Chief doesn't want to rule for ever because he is sensible. Even when a man marries a woman he does not marry her for ever. One day one of them will die and the marriage will end. So my people and I said No.' _There was a huge applause, not only from the tables where the Abazon people sat but from other tables as well.__ 'But that was not the end. More shifting-eyes people came and said: Because you said no to the Big Chief he is very angry and has ordered all the water bore-holes they are digging in your area to be closed so that you will know what it means to offend the sun. You will suffer so much that in your next reincarnation you will need no one to tell you to say yes whether the matter is clear to you or not.' 'God will not agree,' replied many voices. 'So we came to Bassa to say our own yes and perhaps the work on our bore-holes will start again and we will not all perish from the anger of the sun. We did not know before but we know now that yes does not cause trouble. We do not fully understand the ways of today yet but we are learning. A dancing masquerade in my town used to say: It is true I do not hear English but when they say _Catch am__ nobody tells me to take myself off as fast as I can.' _There was loud laughter from all parts of the courtyard, some of the people savouring the joke by repeating it to themselves or to their neighbours and laughing all over again.__ 'So we are ready to learn new things and mend our old, useless ways. If you cross the Great River to marry a wife you must be ready for the risk of night journey by canoe ... I don't know whether the people we have come to see will listen to our cry for water or not. Sometime ago we were told that the Big Chief himself was planning to visit our villages and see our suffering. Then we were told again that he was not coming because he had just remembered that we had said no to him two years ago. So we said, if he will not come, let us go and visit him instead in his house. It is proper that a beggar should visit a king. When a rich man is sick a beggar goes to visit him and say sorry. When the beggar is sick, he waits to recover and then goes to tell the rich man that he has been sick. It is the place of the poor man to make a visit to the rich man who holds the yam and the knife.' 'That is indeed the world,' replied the audience. 'Whether our coming to the Big Chief's compound will do any good or not we cannot say. We did not see him face to face because he was talking to another Big Chief like himself who is visiting from another country. But we can go back to our people and tell them that we have struggled for them with what remaining strength we have ... Once upon a time the leopard who had been trying for a long time to catch the tortoise finally chanced upon him on a solitary road. _Aha__, he said; _at long last! Prepare to die.__ And the tortoise said: _Can I ask one favour before you kill me?__ The leopard saw no harm in that and agreed. _Give me a few moments to prepare my mind__, the tortoise said. Again the leopard saw no harm in that and granted it. But instead of standing still as the leopard had expected the tortoise went into strange action on the road, scratching with hands and feet and throwing sand furiously in all directions. _Why are you doing that?__ asked the puzzled leopard. The tortoise replied: _Because even after I am dead I would want anyone passing by this spot to say, yes, a fellow and his match struggled here.__ 'My people, that is all we are doing now. Struggling. Perhaps to no purpose except that those who come after us will be able to say: _True, our fathers were defeated but they tried.__' WHEN IKEM GOT to his parked car outside the big iron archway on which HARMONEY HOTEL shone in fluorescent letters he found a huge police motor cycle parked in such a way behind it as, quite clearly, to prevent its moving out. As he looked around in surprise a police constable stepped out of the shadows and asked: 'Na you get this car?' 'Yes, anything the matter?' 'Why you no put parking light?' Parking light. That was a new one. He had never been asked about parking light in Bassa before. But never mind. 'Well, I didn't see any need. With all this light around.' He waved his hand at the many fluorescent tubes shining from Harmoney Hotel's perimeter walls. 'So when you see electric for somebody's wall it follow say you no go put your parking light? What section of Traffic Law be that one?' 'It's a matter of common sense, I should say.' 'Common sense! So me self I no get common sense; na so you talk. OK, Mr. Commonsense, make I see your particulars.' A number of people had come out of the hotel premises to watch the palaver and were joined by a few passers-by on the road. Very soon every Abazon man still around had joined the scene and the Master of Ceremonies stepped forward and asked the policeman if he did not know the Editor of the _National Gazette__. 'I no know am! Na sake of editor he come abuse me when I de do my work. He can be editor for his office not for road.' 'He no abuse you. I de here all the time,' said one bystander. 'Make you shut your smelling mouth there, Mr. Lawyer. Abi you want come with me for Charge Office to explain? You no hear when he say I no get common sense. That no be abuse for your country? Oga, I want see your particulars. Na you people de make the law na you dey break am.' Without uttering another word Ikem produced his papers and handed over to the policeman. 'Wey your insurance?' 'That's what you are looking at.' He opened a notebook, placed it on the bonnet of the car and began to write, now and again referring to Ikem's documents. The growing crowd of spectators stood in silence in a circle around the car and the chief actors, the policeman playing his role of writing down somebody's fate with the self-important and painful slowness of halfliteracy ... At long last he tore out a sheet of his note-paper and handed it like a death warrant to Ikem. 'Come for Traffic Office for Monday morning, eight o'clock sharp. If you no come or you come late you de go answer for court. _Kabisa__.' 'Can I have my papers back?' The policeman laughed indulgently at this clever-stupid man. 'That paper wey I give you just now na your cover till Monday. If any police ask you for particular show am that paper. And when you come for Monday make you bring am.' He folded Ikem's documents and put them with his notebook into his breast pocket and buttoned down the flap with the flourish of a judge's gavel. The Master of Ceremonies was boiling into another protest but Ikem made the sign of silence to him--a straight finger across sealed lips, and then swung the same finger around to hint at the law officer's holster. 'Don't provoke a man doing his duty. The police have something they call accidental discharge.' 'No be me go kill you, my friend.' This retort was made frontally to Ikem. With a strange expression of mockery and hatred on his face the policeman mounted his heavy machine and roared away. The Master of Ceremonies asked Ikem: 'Did you get his number?' 'I'm afraid I didn't think of that. Anyway it doesn't matter.' 'Here it is.' And he held to him a number written with biro on the palm of his left hand and Ikem took it down on the back of his summons paper. MONDAY MORNING at the Traffic Police Office. Ikem had decided to do what he rarely did--use his clout. There were more important things to do with his time than engage in fisticuffs with a traffic warden. So he had telephoned the Superintendent of Traffic from his office and made an appointment for nine-thirty. There was a senior officer waiting for him at the Desk Sergeant's front room who took him straight into the Superintendent's office. 'I never meet you before in person sir,' said the Superintendent springing out from behind his massive wooden desk. 'Very pleased to meet you sir ... I was expecting a huge fellow like this,' and he made a sign sideways and upwards. 'No, I am quite small. Anyone who feels like it can actually beat me up quite easily.' 'Oh no. The pen is mightier than the sword. With one sentence of your sharp pen you can demolish anybody. Ha ha ha ha ha. I respect your pen, sir ... What can I do for you, sir. I know you are a busy man and I don't want to waste your time.' As Ikem told his story he thought he saw something like relief spreading through the man's face. 'Is that all? You shouldn't have come all this way for that. You should have told me on the phone and I should have asked the stupid fellow to bring your particulars himself to you and to stay there and wash your car before coming back. These boys have no common sense.' 'Well, I suppose he was only doing his job.' 'What kind of nonsense job is that? To go about contravening important people.' He slapped his open palm on the buzzer with such violence that the orderly who scampered in from the outer office was confusedly straightening his cap, holding his loose belt and attempting a salute all at the same time. 'Go and bring me at once everybody who was on road duty on Saturday night.' 'Sorry, it was Friday night,' said Ikem. 'Sorry, Friday! Everybody here one time. Except those on beat ... Again Mr. Osodi, I must apologize to you for this embarrassment.' 'No problem, Superintendent.' He had thought of putting in another mitigating word for the constable but remembered his utterly atrocious behaviour and held his peace. At that point eight worried constables were marched in. Ikem spotted his man at once but decided that even engaging his eye would be a mark of friendship. They saluted and stood stock-still, their worried eyes alone swivelling around like things with a life of their own. The Superintendent gazed at them in turn without saying a word. In his code they were _all__ guilty at this stage. 'Do you know this gentlemen?' They all shook their heads. 'How you go know? Stupid ignoramuses. Who contravened him on Friday night at ... Mr. Osodi, where did it happen?' 'Outside Harmoney Hotel on Northwest Street.' This announcement was followed by the briefest pause of surprise or even shock which was mercifully overtaken by the constable's owning up. 'Na me, sir.' 'Na you! You no know who this man be? But how you go know? When you no de read newspaper. You pass standard six self?' 'Yes sir.' 'Na lie! Unless na free primary you pass. This man is Mr. Osodi, the Editor of the _National Gazette__. Everybody in the country knows him except you. So you carry your stupid nonsense and go and contravene a man of such calibre. Tomorrow now if he takes up his pen to lambast the Police you all go begin complain like monkey wey im mother die ... Go and bring his particulars here one time, stupid yam-head.' The poor fellow scampered out of the room. 'Now all of you listen well. You see this man here, make una look im face well well. If any of you go out tomorrow and begin to fool around his car I go give the person proper _gbali-gbali__. You understand?' 'Yes sir.' 'Nonsense police. You think na so we do am come reach superintendent. Tomorrow make you go contravene His Excellency for road and if they ask you you say you no know am before. Scallywags. Fall out!' BECAUSE OF HIS VISIT to the Police Traffic Department at the other end of town Ikem had had to conduct his daily Editorial Conference two hours late. In making his apologies he naturally recounted his recent brushes with the police the details of which added considerable entertainment to the proceedings of a routine conference. The only person who did not seem to find any of it in the least amusing was Ikem's second-incommand, an earnest but previously obsequious fellow who in the last several months had struck Ikem as becoming suddenly a lot more aloof and inclined to disagree openly with whatever he said. Back in his room Ikem's officious stenographer gave him two messages, one from John Kent, the Mad Medico, who asked Ikem to call him back and the other from Elewa who said she would call again. MM picked up the phone at the first ring and went straight into his business. He was wondering whether Ikem would be free to drop by for a quick drink this afternoon to meet a friend of his, a poet and editor from England. Ikem accepted most enthusiastically. 'Sure! I haven't seen you in a long time. What have you been doing with yourself? And as for meeting a live poet and editor I just can't believe the luck. Can I bring my girlfriend?' 'But of course. Which one by the way? Never mind bring whoever you like ... Fivish. See you then. Cheerio.' It was amazing, Ikem thought, how brief and businesslike MM could be at work. No sign of his madness once he climbed into that chair as the Hospital Administrator. Except the one near-fatal relapse--the Strange Case of the Graffiti, as Ikem called it in a famous editorial. TEN _Impetuous Son__ Africa tell me Africa Is this you this back that is bent This back that breaks under the weight of humiliation This back trembling with red scars And saying yes to the whip under the midday sun But a grave voice answers me Impetuous son, that tree young and strong That tree there In splendid loneliness amidst white and faded flowers That is Africa your Africa That grows again patiently obstinately And its fruit gradually acquire The bitter taste of liberty (David Diop--'Africa') THEY WERE JUST ABOUT LEAVING his flat for MM's place when the doorbell rang and two strange men smiling from ear to ear faced him at the landing. Ikem stood his ground at the doorway the apprehension that would certainly have been in order relieved only by those vast smiles. 'Can I help you?' 'We just come salute you.' 'Me? Who are you? I don't seem to remember.' 'We be taxi-drivers.' 'I see.' Elewa had now joined him at the door. The visitors were still smiling bravely in spite of the cold welcome. As soon as Elewa came into view one of the visitors said: 'Ah, madam, you de here.' 'Ah, no be you carry me go home from here that night?' 'Na me, madam. You remember me. Very good. I no think say you fit remember.' 'So wetin you come do here again? Abi, you just discover I no pay you complete? Or perhaps na counterfeit I give you.' 'No madam. We just come salute this oga.' At this point the normal courtesies which the prevalence of armed robberies had virtually banished from Bassa could no longer be denied. Ikem and Elewa moved back into the room and the visitors followed them in. 'Ah, madam I no know say I go find you here, self.' 'Why you no go find me here? This man na your sister husband?' 'No madam I no mean am like that.' 'Don't worry. Na joke I de joke. Make una sidon. We de go out before but you fit sidon small.' By this time Ikem had realized who one of the visitors was--the taxi driver who had taken Elewa home late one evening about a week ago. But why he should be back now with another man and smiling profusely like an Air Kangan passenger who has achieved a boarding pass, was still a mystery. Elewa put it a little differently. 'When I see you smiling like person wey win raffle I say: who be this again? Then my brain just make _krim__ and I remember ... Who your friend be?' 'My friend de drive taxi like myself and he be member for Central Committee of Taxi Driver Union.' 'Welcome.' 'Thank you madam. Thank you oga.' 'Even na this my friend tell me that day say na oga be Editor of _Gazette__. Wonderful! And me I no know that.' 'How you go know? You de read paper?' 'Ah, Madam I de try read small. The thing we this oga de write na waa. We like am plenty.' 'Tell me one thing you done read.' 'Ah. How I go begin count. The thing oga write too plenty. But na for we small people he de write every time. I no sabi book but I sabi say na for we this oga de fight, not for himself. He na big man. Nobody fit do fuckall to him. So he fit stay for him house, chop him oyibo chop, drink him cold beer, put him air conditioner and forget we. But he no do like that. So we come salute am.' 'Thank you very much,' said Ikem deeply touched. 'Can I offer you a drink of something?' 'Don't worry sir,' they said. They knew he was going out and must not delay him too much. It was then the real story of the visit came out. This man was not only the driver who drove Elewa home from here that evening over a week ago. He was by the strangest of coincidences the driver Ikem got into a bizarre contest with for a tiny space of road in a dreadful traffic jam. And now he had come, and brought a friend along, to make an apology! 'Oh my God. You don't owe me any apology. None whatsoever. I should apologize to you, my friend.' Ikem walked up to him to shake his hand but he offered not one but both his hands as a mark of respect. The trade unionist did the same. Ikem felt awkward, but also in a strange way, somehow elated. It was uncomfortable to be reminded that with his education and all that he could so easily get embroiled in a completely ridiculous fight with a taxi-driver. The elation came perhaps from this rare human contact across station and class with these two who had every cause to feel hatred but came instead with friendship, acting out spontaneously and without self-righteousness what their betters preach so often but so seldom practise. Apparently it was the trade unionist who was in the car behind the car behind Ikem in the traffic and it was he who recognized Ikem as he turned into the Presidential Palace and promptly told the other; and the two decided on a visit of apology immediately. But it had taken them all this time to track down Ikem's address, only to discover that one of them had been there so recently. Na God him work, was the way he summed up the string of coincidences. The trade unionist who had so far played only a supporting role to his friend now spoke up: 'I want answer that question which Madam ask my friend: to call one thing we done read for _Gazette__. Me self I fit call hundred things but time no dey. So I go talk about the one every taxi-driver know well well. Before before, the place where we get Central Taxi Park for Slaughterhouse Road de smell pass nyarsh. Na there every cattle them want kill come pass him last shit, since time dem born my grandfather. Na him this oga take him pen write, write, write sotay City Council wey de sleep come wake up and bring bulldozer and throway every rubbish and clean the place well well. So that if you park your taxi there you no fit get bellyache like before, or cover your nose with cloth. Even the place so clean now that if the akara wey you de chop fall down for road you fit pick am up and throw for mouth. Na this oga we sidon quiet so na him do am. Na him make I follow my friend come salute am. Madam, I beg you, make you de look am well. Na important personality for this country.' 'Make you no worry for that,' said his friend, 'Madam de look am well well. That day I come pick madam from here I think say them make small quarrel ...' 'Shut your mouth. Who tell you say we de make small quarrel?' 'Madam, I no need for somebody to tell me when man and woman make small quarrel. When you see the woman eye begin de flash like ambulance you go know. But that day when I de vex because oga shine torch for my eye the same madam wey de grumble come tell me not to worry because the oga can talk sharp but na very kind man. No be so you tell me as we drive for night?' Elewa nodded. 'But why you no tell me at the same time say na Editor of _Gazette__?' 'Why I go tell you? And if I tell you wetin you go do with am? Illiteracy de read paper for your country?' 'Wonderful! You no see say because you no tell me, I come make another big mistake. If I for know na such big oga de for my front for that go-slow how I go come make such wahala for am? I de craze? But the thing wey confuse me properly well be that kind old car wey he come de drive. I never see such! Number one, the car too old; number two, you come again de drive am yourself. Wonderful! So how I fit know na such big man de for my front? I just think this I-go-drive-myself na some jagajaga person wey no fit bring out money to pay driver, and come block road for everybody. To God, na so I think.' 'Never mind,' said Ikem. 'That wahala for road no be such bad thing as he come make us friends now for house.' 'That na true, oga. Wonderful!' As he drove to Mad Medico's place that afternoon Ikem turned over and over in his mind one particular aspect of the visit of the taxi-driver and his friend--how it seemed so important to him to explain his failure to recognize an admired 'personality' like Ikem; and how adroitly he had shifted the guilt for this failure round to the very same object of admiration for driving a battered old Datsun instead of a Mercedes and for driving with his own hands instead of sitting in the owner's corner and being driven. So in the midst of all their fulsome and perfectly sincere praise of Ikem those two also managed to sneak in a couple of body-blows. Ikem could understand well enough the roots of the paradox in which a man's personal choice to live simply without such trimmings as chauffeurs could stamp him not as a modest and exemplary citizen but as a mean-minded miser denying a livelihood to one unemployed driver out of hundreds and thousands roaming the streets--a paradox so perverse in its implications as to justify the call for the total dismantling of the grotesque world in which it grows--and flourishes. But even in such a world how does one begin to explain the downtrodden drivers' wistful preference for a leader driving not like themselves in a battered and spluttering vehicle but differently, stylishly in a Mercedes and better still with another downtrodden person like themselves for a chauffeur? Perhaps a root-and-branch attack would cure that diseased tolerance too, a tolerance verging on admiration by the trudging-jigger-toed oppressed for the Mercedes-Benz-driving, private-jet-flying, luxury-yacht-cruising oppressor. An insistence by the oppressed that his oppression be performed in style! What half-way measures could hope to cure that? No, it had to be full measure, pressed down and flowing over! Except that in dictatorships of the proletariat where roots have already been dug up and branches hacked away, an atavistic tolerance seems to linger, quite unexpectedly, for the stylishness of dachas and special shops etc. etc., for the revolutionary lite. Therefore what is at issue in all this may not be systems after all but a basic human failing that may only be alleviated by a good spread of general political experience, slow of growth and obstinately patient like the young tree planted by David Diop on the edge of the primeval desert just before the year of wonders in which Africa broke out so spectacularly in a rash of independent nation states! When finally Ikem's thoughts broke out into words seeking Elewa's view on the matter her response was sharply and decisively on the side of basic nature and the taxidrivers: 'I no tell you that before say this kind car wey you get de make person shame. To day he no get battery, tomorrow him tyre burst. I done talk say if you no want bring money for buy better car why you no take one good Peugeot from office as others de do and take one driver make he de drive am for you. Your own work different than other people? No be the same government work? Me I no understand am-o.' ELEVEN THE SENSE OF EXHILARATION which had descended on Ikem after the taxi-drivers' visit stayed with him all afternoon and into the night, a night in which Elewa, touched by the flame of this novel excitement opened to him new reserves of tenderness exceptional even for her. Back now from driving her home he brewed himself a strong cup of black coffee to ward off physical languor from the precincts of his charged and alert mind and sat back to think. In such situations much of his thinking came in strong, even exaggerated, images. He saw himself as an explorer who has just cleared a cluster of obstacles in an arduous expedition to earn as a result the conviction, more by intuition perhaps than logic, that although the final goal of his search still lies hidden beyond more adventures and dangers, the puzzles just unravelled point unambiguously to inevitable success. The drivers' visit was probably not the cause but only the occasion of this sense of thrill and expectancy--a culmination perhaps of several related events beginning with the happenings of last Friday. Or perhaps it merely triggered an awareness going far, far back in his subconscious mind waiting like a dormant seed in the dry season soil for the greenfingered magician, the first rain. In any event he had always had the necessity in a vague but insistent way, had always felt a yearning without very clear definition, to connect his essence with earth and earth's people. The problem for him had never been whether it should be done but how to do it with integrity. At some point he had assumed, quite naively, that public affairs so-called might provide the handle he needed. But his participation in these affairs had yielded him nothing but disenchantment and a final realization of the incongruity of the very term 'public' as applied to those affairs shrouded as they are in the mist of unreality and floating above and away from the lives and concerns of ninety-nine percent of the population. Public affairs! They are nothing but the closed transactions of soldiersturned-politicians, with their cohorts in business and the bureaucracy. Ikem could not even guarantee now that his own limited participation had not been fatally flawed. His most poignant editorials such as his condemnation of the human blood sport called public execution, his general dissatisfaction with government policies; his quarrels and arguments with Chris; everything now began to take on the vaporous haze of a mirage. Of course, he admitted bitterly, we always take the precaution of invoking the people's name in whatever we do. But do we not at the same time make sure of the people's absence, knowing that if they were to appear in person their scarecrow presence confronting our pious invocations would render our words too obscene even for sensibilities as robust as ours? The prime failure of this government began also to take on a clearer meaning for him. It can't be the massive corruption though its scale and pervasiveness are truly intolerable; it isn't the subservience to foreign manipulation, degrading as it is; it isn't even this second-class, hand-me-down capitalism, ludicrous and doomed; nor is it the damnable shooting of striking railway-workers and demonstrating students and the destruction and banning thereafter of independent unions and cooperatives. It is the failure of our rulers to re-establish vital inner links with the poor and dispossessed of this country, with the bruised heart that throbs painfully at the core of the nation's being. Naive romantics would have us believe that this heart at the core is in perfect health. How could it be? Sapped by regimes of parasites, ignorant of so many basic things though it does know some others; crippled above all by this perverse kindliness towards oppression conducted with panache! How could it be in perfect health? Impossible! But despite its many flaws this can be said for it that it does possess an artless integrity, a stubborn sense of community which can enable Elewa to establish so spontaneously with the driver a teasing affectionateness beyond the powers of Ikem. How then, he asked himself, how can he partake of this source of stability and social meaning? Not (again as the romantics would have him do) by pretending to be like the poor; by wearing specially and expensively aged and patched jeans in mockery of their tatters. Why should he add to the insults they already bear? How then? What about renouncing my own experience, needs and knowledge? But could I? And should I? I could renounce needs perhaps, but experience and knowledge, how? There seems no way I can become like the poor except by faking. What I know, I know for good or ill. So for good or ill I shall remain myself; but with this deliberate readiness now to help, and be helped. Like those complex, multivalent atoms in Biochemistry books I have arms that reach out in all directions--a helping hand, a hand signalling for help. With one I shall touch the earth and leave another free to wave to the skies. Aha! Come to think of it, that might explain the insistence of the oppressed that the oppressor must not be allowed to camouflage his appearance or confuse the poor by stealing and masquerading in their clothes. Perhaps it is the demand of that primitive integrity of the earth ... Or, who knows, it might also be something less innocent (for the earth does have its streak of peasant cunning)--an insistence that your badge of privilege must never leave your breast, nor your coat of many colours your back ... so that ... on the wrathful day of reckoning ... you will be as conspicuous as a peacock! HIS EXCELLENCY was pacing agitatedly like a caged tiger in the confined space between his desk and the far wall, his hands held tensely behind him, right fist gripped in left palm. He motioned Chris to sit and continued to pace for what seemed like a full minute more before he spoke: 'At last! But God knows I did not ask for it. It's you, my oldest friends, you and Ikem who swore for reasons best known to you to force a show-down. What more can I say except: So be it ... While investigations continue into Ikem's link with the Abazon agitators he cannot continue to edit the _National Gazette__. But I must still do things properly and constitutionally no matter the provocation. That's why I have sent for you. I want you as Commissioner for Information to issue a formal letter suspending him with immediate effect.' 'Hold it, Your Excellency. I don't understand. What exactly is he supposed to have done?' 'Are you serious? You really don't know?' 'I am afraid no.' 'Well, let's not waste time by getting into who knows what, now ... Intelligence reports have established that he was involved in planning the recent march on this Palace by agitators claiming to come from Abazon. In fact they were found on careful investigation to be mostly motor-park touts, drug pushers and other criminal elements right here in Bassa.' 'I am sorry but I can't believe that.' 'In this job Chris, beliefs are not my primary concern. I am no bishop. My concern is the security of this state. You should know that; you are Commissioner for Information. Anyhow, let me assure you there is incontrovertible evidence that Ikem was in contact with these fellows in the quadrangle right here and later drove to a hotel in North Bassa to hold a secret meeting with them. How's that? Well, you seem to be in a sceptical mood; what will you say then if I tell you that the security agents shadowing him actually arrested him for a minor traffic offence outside the hotel as he was about to leave? Just to make sure no alibis are invented ... Good, isn't it, to know that some organs of government still perform effectively in this country.' 'Can I speak with him?' 'How do you mean? Have you not been speaking with him? Oh, I think I see what you mean. He isn't in custody or anything of the sort. Not yet. So I certainly think you should see him. But first of all I want him suspended from duty and barred completely from the premises of the _Gazette__. Is that clear?' 'No it is not. I am sorry Your Excellency but I will not write a letter suspending the Editor of the _National Gazette__ simply because some zealous security officer has come up with a story ...' 'I see I have been wasting my breath ...' 'If they think they have a case against him let them send him a query themselves or suspend him if they have no patience for such bureaucratic niceties as queries. I don't see how I come into it.' 'Listen. The way I see it this matter is not likely to end with mere suspension for conspiring with thugs to invade the Presidential Palace. That may be only the merest tip of the iceberg. There is some indication that Ikem might have colluded with these same people to sabotage the presidency referendum two years ago. I don't mind telling you that your own role in that fiasco was never cleared up satisfactorily either and may well come up for further investigation.' 'What on earth are you talking about ...?' 'So I sincerely hope--and pray--that you will not make your own position ... you know ... more difficult at this stage. It would be most unwise I can assure you. If I were in your shoes I would go and issue the letter as instructed and await further developments.' 'And if I refuse?' 'I shouldn't if I were you.' 'Well, Your Excellency, for once I am turning you down. I will not carry out this instruction and I hereby tender my resignation.' 'Resignation! Ha ha ha ha ha. Where do you think you are? Westminster or Washington DC? Come on! This is a military government in a backward West African State called Kangan ...' 'We wouldn't be so backward if we weren't so bent on remaining so ...' 'Some day you will have a chance to change all that when you become the boss. Right now this boss here won't accept resignations unless of course he has taken the trouble himself to ask for them. Right? This may sound strange to you I know because up until now this same boss has allowed you and others to call the shots. Not any more, Chris. I will be doing the calling from now on and I intend to call quite a few before I am done. Now is that clear? I want that letter to be in Ikem's hands by close of work today, without fail. You may go now.' Chris left without another word but unshaken in his defiance. He made for his office, intending to begin right away the removal of his private papers and odds and ends to his residence until he could vacate there as well. As soon as he stepped into his office, however, he was handed the telephone by a flustered secretary. His Excellency on the line. 'Yes, Chris. I have reconsidered this matter. You do have a point in not wishing to write the suspension letter yourself. I wanted to do you the honour of appearing to be still in charge of your ministry. But never mind. We will take it from here. Meanwhile the SRC Director will be chatting with you on a number of leads he has developed on the bungling of the referendum and other matters. For God's sake give him maximum cooperation.' HIS EXCELLENCY was living up to his threat to do things constitutionally even in the face of all the provocations. The letter to Ikem which was hand-delivered to his flat by a police despatch-rider that afternoon had been signed by a certain Chairman, Board of Directors of Kangan Newspapers Corporation, publishers of the _National Gazette__. A certain chairman because the board and the corporation in question had been moribund for the past three years or more. Ikem had never met the said Chairman or seen a single letter signed by him since he took up the editorship. Incredible! He carried the letter like a trophy to Chris's house after he got a message that Chris wanted to see him urgently. Beatrice was already there when he arrived. She had something like a puzzled look on her face when she greeted him. Perhaps she had expected him to come in bristling with combativeness instead of which he seemed so strangely composed, even serene. Was it the look of a prospective martyr who has successfully trained his soul's gaze to look past the blurred impending ordeal to the sharply focussed crown of glory far beyond. She noted but said nothing about this new person and the effect it seemed already to be having on his host, for it was truly extraordinary the way these two sat down quietly and began to trade details of their separate and related predicaments like a pair of hypochondriacs reminiscing on their sweet injuries. Without realizing it, Beatrice had responded by striking her characteristic pose of detachment--sitting somewhat stiff and erect, her arms folded firmly across her breasts. But instead of staring fixedly away into median space to complete the attitude she made a concession to her indestructible interest by constantly swivelling her glance from one face to the other as the two men carried on their surprising duet. At last her loaded silence struck Chris. 'BB, you are saying nothing.' 'What do you want me to say?' 'BB said all that needed to be said when it might have been useful.' 'But we were too busy with our private diversionary war.' 'Don't be so hard on us; we were not alone in that. All the wars ever fought in this country were, are, diversionary. So why not the little running battles we staged now and again to keep our sanity. You seem to doubt my claim? All right, you tell me one thing we ... this government ... any of us did in the last three years ... or for that matter in the previous nine years of civilian administration that wasn't altogether diversionary.' 'Well the diversion has ended,' said Beatrice. 'Has it? I'm not so sure. This letter here and all this new theatre of the absurd that Sam is directing to get rid of me and to intimidate Chris, what's it in aid of? Diversion, pure and simple. Even the danger I see looming ahead when the play gets out of hand, what has any of this to do with the life and the concerns and the reality of ninety-nine percent of the people of Kangan? Nothing whatsoever.' 'Well, I still think that if you and Chris had listened to me and stopped your running battles as you call them early enough he would not now be trying to disgrace you.' 'Disgrace? I'm surprised at you, BB. I didn't know you could be so incredibly sanguine. Disgrace? The fellow wants to kill us! He is mad, I tell you. His acting has got into his head, finally.' 'Well, I think BB is closer to the mark. As usual. I agree the fellow is completely deluded and can therefore be very dangerous. But his interest at this point is limited to making us look small, not murder. What he told me on the telephone this morning was very significant I think. He was giving me a chance, he said, to still appear as the Commissioner for Information.' 'Did he say that? And what does that mean?' 'Well, _appearing__ is very important to him. _Not appearing__ is, of course, the worst kind of disgrace. And all this is tied up in his mind with his failed referendum for life president. The pain still rankles. I don't think I told this to either of you at the time. But after the failure of the referendum he had complained bitterly to Professor Okong that I had not played my part as Commissioner for Information to ensure the success of the exercise and that you had seen fit to abandon your editorial chair at that crucial moment and take your annual leave.' 'Professor Okong told you?' 'Yes, but I then confronted him. At first he pretended to make light of it but I wouldn't let go. So in the end he revealed his bitterness. He said that he was deeply wounded that we, his oldest friends, found it possible to abandon him and allow him to be disgraced. Those were his very words.' 'Did he really say that?' 'I reminded him that he never really wanted to be Life President. That made him truly, hopping mad. _I didn't__, he said, _and you know I didn't but the moment it was decided upon you had a clear responsibility, you and Ikem, to see it succeed. You chose not to.__ I never before heard so much bitter emotion in his voice.' 'And you didn't mention this to Ikem? I don't ask about myself, who am I? But to Ikem, no? You never cease to surprise me, Chris. Nothing in this world can make your heart race!' 'That was more than two years ago. I didn't think then it was all that important. In fact I never thought of it in this light until you used the word _disgrace__ just now.' 'It doesn't speak too highly of your power of analysis or insight which is what I have always told you.' 'Please Ikem, please, let's not slip back into our routine running battles, yet ...' 'No no, BB. I am serious. If Chris had reported this to me at the time I should have insisted that we both resign there and then and we would not be in this mess today. You see what I mean?' 'Perhaps. But we lost that chance. What I want to know is what Chris proposes to do now and what he recommends you do.' 'Simple. I shall draft my letter of resignation tonight and have it delivered to him tomorrow morning. For Ikem I strongly, most strongly, urge a period of silence until ...' 'Rubbish, Chris, rubbish! The very worst prescription for a suspended editor is silence. That's what your proprietor wants. Because he makes reams of paper available to you he believes he owns your voice. So when he feels like it he withdraws the paper to show you how silent you can be without his help. You musn't let him win' 'So are you going to set up a new paper of your own then?' 'Don't be ridiculous. If you can't write you can surely get up and talk. You haven't lost your vocal chords.' 'Where do you intend to talk? In a corner of Gelegele market?' 'Oh, Chris!' 'Never mind. All I say is _careful! That's all. Or Kabisa.__ Though I haven't heard him use that lately.' 'Not when it has filtered down to motor mechanics,' said Beatrice. 'That's right.' 'Ikem, I think Chris is right. You've got to lie low for the next couple of weeks, so we can plan our moves properly. Chris is right about that though I think you are closer to the mark about the danger.' 'Well I wasn't exactly going to create Hyde Park Corner in Gelegele in spite of Chris's insinuations. But people are going to ask me questions, and I shall bloody well answer. I'm not going to crawl into a hole ...' A taxi-cab seemed to be having some difficulty with the police sentry. Chris who had a view of the gate from where he sat, got up, moved to the entrance door, clapped his hands to attract the sentry's attention and signalled to him to let whoever it was come in. But the taxi-driver had already lost his patience, it appeared, and was heatedly discharging his passenger right there. The passenger turned out to be Elewa. She paid and collected her change in a state of flutter clearly discernible from where Chris stood and rushed into the house breathless and deeply agitated. Ignoring welcoming greetings from everybody she flung herself at Ikem. 'Wetin I de hear, Ikem? Na true say dem done sack you?' Ikem nodded his head as he pressed her to himself. She burst into tears and violent crying and in that brief instant exploded the atmosphere in the room. All three were embarrassed by this intrusive emotion, but more especially the men, and each put in a clumsy word or two to console the girl and restore the original calm. 'Oh come on, Elewa. I am only suspended not sacked ... Who told you anyway?' That did it. She stopped crying almost as dramatically as she had begun. But her voice, when she spoke, was broken and heavy with grief. 'Everybody de talk am for our yard. Even my mama wey de sick hear am small for six o'clock news from our neighbour him radio. But me I go chemist for buy medicine for am.' 'Never mind, my dear. You see I still de alive and well.' 'I thank God for that.' 'How mama be today?' 'E de better small ... You say no be sack them sack you na ... weting you call am?' 'Na suspend they suspend me.' 'Weting be suspend? ... I beg, BB weting be suspend?' 'My sister, make you no worry yourself. As we de alive so, na that one better pass all ... I no know say your mama no well. Sorry. You done take am go hospital?' 'Hospital? Who get money for hospital? And even if you find money, the wahala wey de there ... My sister, na chemist we small people de go.' IT WAS ELEWA'S KEEN EARS which picked up the radio news signal from some distant set turned too high probably in someone's Boys' Quarters in the neighbourhood, and her voice which screamed 'News!' Chris sprang up and dashed to his television set, switching it on and checking his wristwatch at the same time. Elewa was right. The eight o'clock national news was about to begin. They all sat back in grim-faced silence to watch. Ikem's suspension was the first headline. Something approaching an amused look crept into his features for the brief duration of his limelight--a straightforward announcement without frills. Then all of a sudden he was stung as if by a scorpion and he screamed and leapt to his feet. 'Oh no!' he shouted. 'They can't do that! Chris did you hear that? And you say I should lie low. Lie low and let these cannibals lay their dirty hands on a holy man of the earth. Switch that damn thing off!' He was already making for the television set when Chris's voice telling him to get a hold of himself told him also that this was not his television set, nor this his house. He went back and sank into his seat, his left thumbnail between his teeth. Then he got up again: 'Elewa, let's go!' What had caused all this agitation had been a subsidiary item tagged on to Ikem's news because of its relative unimportance and prefaced accordingly with the formula: _In another development...__ Yes, in another development, according to this smug newscaster dispensing national anguish in carefully measured milligrammes, six leaders from Abazon who were involved in a recent illegal march on the Presidential Palace without police permit as required by decree had been arrested. And (in the same development) the office of the Director of SRC had informed the Crime Correspondent of KTV that the six men who had made useful statements were being held in BMSP. TWELVE ON THE TWO PREVIOUS occasions when Ikem had spoken before audiences at the University of Bassa he had attracted large crowds, but nothing quite on the scale of the present event. Every seat in the two-thousand-capacity Main Auditorium was taken and a large overspill sat or stood on gangways or peeped in through doors and windows from the two side-corridors running the length of the hall. It would appear that his suspension from the _National Gazette__ had pushed his popularity rating, already pretty high, right to the top of the charts. Even more remarkable than the size of the crowds was their patience. The lecture took off at least forty minutes behind schedule while sweating Students Union officials dashed in and out of the hall occasionally shouting, 'Testing! Testing! Testing!' into a dead microphone. But such was the good humour of this audience that when the system finally came alive it was given a thunderous ovation. A few last-minute consultations by the organizers and the lecture seemed finally set to begin. But no. First the introductions. A minor union official took the microphone and introduced the Master of Ceremonies, a tall handsome fellow in a white three-piece suit, who in turn and at some length introduced the President of the Union who delivered a most elaborate introduction of the Chairman for the occasion who--at long last-introduced Mr. Ikem Osodi. It was all so reminiscent of the style of campaign meetings in the good old Byzantine days of politicians who, should they rise now from the bowels of their rat-holes and station themselves cautiously just below the surface, would be watching shiny-eyed, twitching their whiskers in happy remembrance. Ikem called his lecture 'The Tortoise and the Leopard--a political meditation on the imperative of struggle.' This announcement was greeted with tumultuous approval. No doubt it had the right revolutionary ring to it and Ikem smiled inwardly at the impending _coup d'tat__ he would stage against this audience and its stereotype notions of struggle, as indeed of everything else. 'Mr. Chairman, sir ...' he said, bowing mock-deferentially to the Professor who had just been eulogized by the Students' Union President as a popular academic admired by all and sundry for his clarity and Marxist orientation who, as the youngest professor in Kangan, had ably redirected Political Science from bourgeois tendencies under Professor Reginald Okong to new heights of scientific materialism ... 'May I crave your indulgence and begin this meditation--not lecture by the way, I never can muster enough audacity to lecture--I meditate. May I begin with a little story.' And he told, to remarkable dramatic and emotional effect, the story of the Tortoise who was about to die. 'That story was told me by an old man. As I stand before you now that old man who told me that incredible story is being held in solitary confinement at the Bassa Maximum Security Prison.' _No! Why! Opposed! Impossible!__ and other sounds of shock and anger flew like sparks and filled the air of the auditorium. 'Why? I hear you ask. Very well ... This is why ... Because storytellers are a threat. They threaten all champions of control, they frighten usurpers of the right-tofreedom of the human spirit--in state, in church or mosque, in party congress, in the university or wherever. That's why.' It was a brief presentation, twenty to twenty-five minutes long, that was all; but it was so well crafted and so powerfully spoken it took on the nature and scope of an epic prose-poem. It was serious but not solemn; sometimes witty without falling into the familiarity of banter. The audience sat or stood silently entranced. Its sudden end was like a blow and it jolted them into shouts of protest. Calls of _Fire! Fire! More! More!__ and even _Opposed!__ soon turned into a rhythmic chant when Ikem sat down. The Chairman turned to him and said, 'They want some more!' 'Yes! More! More! More!' 'I thank you, my friends, for the compliment. But as someone once said: There is nothing left in the pipeline!' 'No! No! Opposed!' 'In any case you have listened to me patiently. Now I want to hear you. Dialogues are infinitely more interesting than monologues. So fire your questions and comments and let's exchange a few blows. You've been at the receiving end. But, as the Bible says, it is better to give than to receive. So let's have a few punches from your end. That's what I've come here for.' And true enough, it was during question-time that he finally achieved the close hand-to-hand struggle he so relished. By nature he is never on the same side as his audience. Whatever his audience is, he must try not to be. If they fancy themselves radical, he fancies himself conservative; if they propound right-wing tenets he unleashes revolution! It is not that he has ever sat down to reason it out and plan it; it just seems to happen that way. But he is aware of it--after the event, so to say, and can even offer some kind of explanation if asked to do so: namely that whatever you are is never enough; you must find a way to accept something however small from the other to make you whole and save you from the mortal sin of righteousness and extremism. A couple of months ago he had been persuaded against his normal inclination to speak at the Bassa Rotary Club weekly luncheon. On that particular occasion the club had more cause than usual to be happy with itself for it had just bought and donated a watertanker to a dispensary in one of the poorest districts of North Bassa, an area that has never had electricity nor pipe-borne water. In the after-dinner haze of good works, cigar smoke and liqueur his hosts sat back to hear what their distinguished guest had to tell them ... Well, as usual, he left what he should have told them and launched into something quite unexpected. Charity, he thundered is the opium of the privileged; from the good citizen who habitually drops ten kobo from his loose change and from a safe height above the bowl of the leper outside the supermarket; to the group of good citizens like yourselves who donate water so that some Lazarus in the slums can have a syringe boiled clean as a whistle for his jab and his sores dressed more hygienically than the rest of him; to the Band Aid stars that lit up so dramatically the dark Christmas skies of Ethiopia. While we do our good works let us not forget that the real solution lies in a world in which charity will have become unnecessary. The rotund geniality of his hosts was instantly shattered and distorted into sharppointed shapes of aggressiveness. That world of yours will be in heaven, sneered one gentleman. Even in heaven, said another, there is seniority. Archangels are senior to common angels. As early as possible Ikem was escorted out of the room by two club officials--a normal practice indeed but which on this occasion was performed with such icy civility that it took on the appearance of showing an ungracious dinner guest to the door straight from the table he has insulted. But this was no Rotary Club and dealing with it would be easier in some ways, but in others probably more difficult. The first questioner was apparently a young member of faculty rather than a student. His question was prefaced with a little lecture of his own on the manifest failure of bourgeois reformism to address the fundamental problems of the Third World in general and Kangan in particular. Did Mr. Osodi not consider, in view of the above, the necessity of putting the nation now under the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat? 'No, I don't. I wouldn't put myself under the democratic dictatorship even of angels and archangels. As for the proletariat I don't think I know who they are in the case of Kangan.' 'Workers and peasants,' said the Chairman, helpfully. 'Workers and peasants,' Ikem repeated into the microphone, 'I have just been told.' 'And students,' a voice from the audience called, causing much laughter. 'Fair enough,' said Ikem. 'Charity begins at home.' More laughter. 'Any other suggestions. We have peasants, workers and students ... Excellent! Will peasants in this hall please stand.' There was now hilarious laughter from all corners of the auditorium, especially when another three-piece-suited gentleman got up and offered himself. 'No, you are not a peasant my good friend. Sit down. I want a proper peasant ... Well, ladies and gentlemen it does appear we have no peasants here tonight. Perhaps they don't even know we are having this meeting ... I am told, by the way, by those who attend shareholders' annual general meetings that there is something called a proxy form which you send nominating somebody else to stand in for you when you cannot yourself be present. Is there anybody here carrying such a document on behalf of peasants? Mr. Chairman, was any proxy form delivered to you?' The learned professor in spite of the heavy burden of his earnestness felt obliged now to join in some of this rather awkward fun. So he shook his head, not too vigorously but well enough to win the applause of the ticklishly humorous crowd. 'Very well. I think we should leave peasants out of the discussion. They are not here and have sent no one to speak on their behalf ... That leaves us with workers and students ...' 'And market women,' chipped in a high female voice from the audience, to a renewed burst of merriment. 'Market women, my dear girl, are in the same category as peasants. They are not here either ... I will let you into a secret I have told nobody else. My prospective motherin-law is a market woman.' Laughter! 'A cash madam,' offered someone. 'No, not a cash madam. A simple market woman ... This is not a joke now. I am really serious. My prospective mother-in-law sells tie-die cloth in Gelegele market. She is not a cash madam as I have said; she can carry all her worldly wares in one head-load. So she qualifies along with peasants for a seat among the proletariat. But she has not given me, her future son-in-law, any authority to be her proxy at this shareholders' meeting ... So let's move on and deal with those we are competent to speak for, namely ourselves. Workers and students. Let's take workers first. Who are they? The same workers who go on strike when outdated and outrageous colonial privileges like motor vehicle advances and allowances are threatened; whose leaders cannot give satisfactory account of millions they collect every month from the compulsory workers' check-off scheme; who never in their congresses attack absenteeism, ghost workers, scandalously low national productivity. Above all, workers whose national president at last year's All-Africa Congress refused to leave his hotel room until an official Peugeot 504 assigned to him was replaced with a Mercedes. His reason you remember: that workers' leaders are not, in his very words, _ordinary riff-raffs__. You find that funny? Well I don't. I find it tragic and true. Workers' leaders are indeed _extraordinary riff-raffs__. There has been, for a few years now, a running battle between me and the Civil Service Union. You know that, don't you?' _Yes__, roared the audience, laughing. 'The reason for our little disagreement is because I have not attempted to hide my opinion of them as plain parasites.' More laughter. 'Those of you who follow our battles may remember that it all came to a head last year when I wrote a stinging editorial on the eve of their Annual Congress.' There was smiling recognition on some faces, some nodding of the head and scattered remnants of laughter. 'In their communiqu at the end of the Congress they referred to certain bourgeois, litist hack writers who are no more and no less than running dogs of imperialism!' Loud laughter. 'You probably didn't know who they were alluding to but it was their way of replying to my editorial. Their way is indeed peculiar. Our proverb says that the earthworm is not dancing, it is only its manner of walking.' Laughter. 'The charge of litism never fails to amaze me because the same people who make it will also criticize you for not prescribing their brand of revolution to the masses. A writer wants to ask questions. These damn fellows want him to give answers. Now tell me, can anything be more litist, more _offensively__ litist, than someone presuming to answer questions that have not even been raised, for Christ's sake? Give us the answer! Give us the answer! You know it was the same old cry heard by Jesus Christ from his lazy-minded, soft-brained, bread-hungry hangers-on in Galilee or Gadarene or wherever it was.' Tremendous outburst of cheers. 'Give us a miracle! Give us a miracle and we will believe in you. Cut out the parables and get to the point. Time is short! We want results! Now, now!' Renewed laughter and more cheers greeted this unexpected and quixotic exploitation of the Holy Writ. 'No I cannot give you the answer you are clamouring for. Go home and think! I cannot decree your pet, text-book revolution. I want instead to excite general enlightenment by forcing all the people to examine the condition of their lives because, as the saying goes, the unexamined life is not worth living ... As a writer I aspire only to widen the scope of that self-examination. I don't want to foreclose it with a catchy, half-baked orthodoxy. My critics say: There is no time for your beautiful educational programme; the masses are ready and will be enlightened in the course of the struggle. And they quote Fanon on the sin of betraying the revolution. They do not realize that revolutions are betrayed just as much by stupidity, incompetence, impatience and precipitate action as by doing nothing at all.' Mixed, cautious applause. He paused as if to consider his next move. 'I think I should take the advantage of this forum to propound the new radicalism which I believe we should embrace.' Applause of expectation. 'First and foremost, this radicalism must be clear-eyed enough to see beyond the present claptrap that will heap all our problems on the doorstep of capitalism and imperialism ... Please don't get me wrong. I do not deny that external factors are still at the root of many of our problems. But I maintain that even if external factors were to be at the root of _all__ our problems we still must be ready to distinguish for practical purposes between remote and immediate causes, as our history teachers used to say.' Smiles of recognition. 'May I remind you that our ancestors--by the way you must never underrate those guys; some of you seem too ready to do so, I'm afraid. Well, our ancestors made a fantastic proverb on remote and immediate causes. If you want to get at the root of murder, they said, you have to look for the blacksmith who made the matchet.' Loud laughter. 'Wonderful proverb, isn't it? But it was only intended to enlarge the scope of our thinking not to guide policemen investigating an actual crime.' Laughter. 'When your fat civil servants and urban employees of public corporations march on May Day wearing ridiculously undersize T-shirts and school-boy caps'--Laughter-'Yes, and spouting cliches from other people's histories and struggles, hardly do they realize that in the real context of Africa today they are not the party of the oppressed but of the oppressor.' Applause. 'For they are the very comrades who preside over the sabotage of the nation by their unproductivity and fraud, and that way ensure that the benefits of modern life will ever remain outside the dreams of the real victims of exploitation in rural villages.' Mixed noises. 'I hear some of you cry _Opposed!__ I like that! Let me substantiate. I never make charges without substantiating.' A few cries of _Fire!__ 'Indeed I will fire! Let's take the Electricity Corporation of Kangan as one example out of many. What do we see? Chaotic billing procedures deliberately done to cover their massive fraud; illegal connections carried out or condoned by their own staff; theft of meters and a host of other petty and serious crimes including, if you please, the readiness at the end of the day to burn down the entire Accounts and Audit Departments if an inquiry should ever be mooted ...' Loud laughter. 'This is not funny you know ...' _Don't mind them!__ said a loud-voiced young man on the front row, frowning severely at his ticklish neighbours. 'To blame all these things on imperialism and international capitalism as our modish radicals want us to do is, in my view, sheer cant and humbug ... It is like going out to arrest the village blacksmith every time a man hacks his fellow to death.' Loud laughter and applause, catching even the severe young man off his guard. 'Shall I go on? No! I will say simply that these people are not workers by any stretch of the imagination. They are parasites, I tell you. And I will not agree to hand over my affairs to a democratic dictatorship of parasites. Never! ... Now what about students? I should really be very careful here as I am quite anxious to get home safely tonight.' Explosion of laughter. 'However, truth will out! I regret to say that students are in my humble opinion the cream of parasites.' Redoubled laughter. 'The other day, did not students on National Service raze to the ground a new maternity block built by peasants? Why? They were protesting against their posting to a remote rural station without electricity and running water. Did you not read about it?' The laughter had died all of a sudden. 'Perhaps someone can show me one single issue in this country in which students as a class have risen above the low, very low, national level. Tribalism? Religious extremism? Even electoral merchandising. Do you not buy and sell votes, intimidate and kidnap your opponents just as the politicians used to do?' The applause was beginning to revive now, albeit far less robustly. 'Are you, as you should be, more competent than those of our countrymen and women not nearly as lucky as yourselves on whom we have squandered our meagre educational resources? It took an hour to start this lecture because a microphone could not be found ... I walked up to this dais exploding groundnut shells under my feet all the way. So what are we talking about? Do you not form tribal pressure groups to secure lower admission requirements instead of striving to equal or excel any student from anywhere? Yes, you prefer academic tariff walls behind which you can potter around in mediocrity. And you are asking me to agree to hand over my life to a democratic dictatorship of mediocrity? No way! ... Now, don't misunderstand me. I have no desire to belittle your role in putting this nation finally on the road to self-redemption. But you cannot do that unless you first set about to purge yourselves, to clean up your act. You must learn for a start to hold your own student leaders to responsible performance; only after you have done that can you have the moral authority to lecture the national leadership. You must develop the habit of scepticism, not swallow every piece of superstition you are told by witch doctors and professors. I see too much parroting, too much regurgitating of half-digested radical rhetoric ... When you have rid yourselves of these things your potentiality for assisting and directing this nation will be quadrupled.' Tremendous applause. Surprisingly? The questions kept coming hard and fast. In the end the chairman simply had to get up and say: Enough! It was then close to midnight. He thanked Mr. Ikem Osodi for a most stimulating lecture and equally stimulating answers to audience questions. He praised the lecturer's contributions to the nation's cultural and political growth in the fields of journalism and literature and hoped that whatever misunderstanding had been responsible for his suspension from duty would soon be resolved. Applause. But there were two issues which he would like to touch upon however briefly. Mild restive protests from the floor. He promised to be brief. He was raising these issues as a sociologist of literature in the context of a writer's ideological development and clarity. First he must confess that he found Mr. Osodi's concept of struggle too individualistic and adventuristic. Some applause. Secondly, on a general note he must state once again his well-known contention that writers in the Third World context must not stop at the stage of documenting social problems but move to the higher responsibility of proffering prescriptions. Applause. 'Writers don't give prescriptions,' shouted Ikem. 'They give headaches!' Uproarious laughter. 'Well, on that note we say thank you to Mr. Osodi for a most entertaining evening.' THIRTEEN ONE OF THE MANY questions Ikem had had to field in the course of his lecture, some briefly and others at some length, concerned a fairly persistent rumour that the Central Bank of Kangan was completing plans to put the President's image on the nation's currency. Was it true and if so what did the honourable lecturer think about such an eventuality? 'Yes I heard of it like everybody else. Whether there is such a plan or not I don't know. All I can say is I hope the rumour is unfounded. My position is quite straightforward especially now that I don't have to worry about being Editor of the _Gazette__. My view is that any serving President foolish enough to lay his head on a coin should know he is inciting people to take if off; the head I mean.' The statement which was roundly applauded in the auditorium was to reverberate louder still throughout the country from the very next morning when the _National Gazette__ came out brandishing in the heaviest possible type the headline: EX-EDITOR ADVOCATES REGICIDE! One of the ifs of recent Kangan history is what the fate of Ikem might have been had he backed out of that speaking engagement at the university. Those who hold that the lecture was decisive are probably underrating the sheer indefatigability of Major Johnson (Samsonite) Ossai, Director of SRC. For he was moving and closing in relentlessly on a number of alternative fronts the most menacing coming from the direction of the controversial expatriate Director of Administration at the Bassa General Hospital, Mr. John Kent, popularly called the Mad Medico. For over a year now the perspicacious Major had had the foresight to keep Mr. Kent under very close but discreet surveillance. And what accrued to the Major from this particular exercise was of such crucial importance that it might have sufficed by itself even if the lecture had not happened. This is not by any means to underrate the new opening offered by the lecture for it did make a dramatic pincer movement and quick kill easy and inevitable. Mr. Kent was hauled in quietly for interrogation, held secretly and incommunicado for four days at the BMSP, released under tight security and deported within forty-eight hours. A terse radio and television announcement of his deportation for activities prejudicial to state security issued by the Directorate of State Research Council when Mr. Kent was already airborne was the first and last official intimation Kangan had of this unexpected event. Few at first could have linked it clearly with the suspension of the Editor of the _National Gazette__ announced earlier although the two announcements coming so close to each other left in many minds the impression that the uneasy calm of the past twelve months might at last be speeding to a close. And then a few hours later there was yet another special announcement. This time it was issued by the Army Council (a body that no one could recall announcing anything in years), and it told the nation simply that, in an extraordinary meeting of the Army Council, Major Johnson Ossai, Director of the State Research Council, was promoted to the rank of full colonel. End of special announcement. He is certainly sticking to his promise to do things constitutionally, thought Chris when he heard this latest bulletin. It was all very well for Beatrice to make fun of his morning routine of informational alienation but no one had yet suggested to him a better way for getting to know what was going on, not in the outside world--that had always known how to wait-but right here in Kangan. So instead of the BBC at seven as usual he got up earlier the next morning and tuned in to its six o'clock news. And true enough Mr. Kent's deportation from the West African state of Kangan, although extremely scanty in detail, had made world news! With one ear glued to the little transistor radio he dialled Ikem's number. He had failed to reach him last night when the news about MM first broke. The houseboy who answered the phone said he had gone out in the afternoon with dat gal .../ And now the telephone was ringing away and nobody was picking it up. Ikem was notorious as a late riser and positively hated to be disturbed early in the morning, but Chris thought that in present circumstances he might at least pick up his phone ... No. Very well. He tried Beatrice next. She answered sleepily at first but on hearing who and what became instantly and intensely alert. 'Try and get the BBC. They are likely to have a fuller story in the African news after the world bulletin.' 'But how does one get the BBC? You know I have never yet been able to find them. All I get is that infuriating thing in special English from the Voice of America. I think my radio must be made by CIA ...' A little later she called back, her voice utterly dejected, to report failure yet again. 'Never mind, dear. Come right over. I managed to record MM off transmission. Meanwhile I am trying to reach Ikem. His ability to sleep through storms is beginning to irritate me ... See you.' By the time Beatrice went over at about seven-forty-five, Chris had been alerted and was making frantic calls all over Bassa without any success. As soon as her car drove in he rushed out. 'Ikem's not in his flat though he went to bed there last night ...' 'He may have gone out early.' 'His car is in the garage and ... let's go and see for ourselves. Can you drive us?' 'Sure.' She noticed he was trembling. The front door was locked so they went round to the back and through the kitchen door to which the houseboy held a spare key. The flat was in a shambles. Books and papers and clothes were strewn everywhere in the living-room and in the master and spare bedrooms. An alarm clock lay among shards of its broken glass beside the bed. The houseboy was repeating what he had already told Chris on the telephone a short while ago when there was a tap on the door and a woman came in uncertainly, and then a man. They were Ikem's neighbours in the adjacent flat. The man, a civil servant, recognized the Commissioner for Information at once. 'Good morning, sir,' he said. Finding the Commissioner there seemed to have lifted his morale and removed some of the gloomy timidity with which he had come in. 'Agnes, this is the Commissioner for Information, Mr. Oriko. Sir, this is my wife.' 'Good morning sir,' said Agnes the wife also brightening up considerably. 'Thank you. Have you seen anything of your neighbour? Since last night?' The man looked at Beatrice questioningly and then around the room and the open doors. 'There is nobody else here. You know who I am. This is Beatrice Okoh, Senior Assistant Secretary, Finance. We are not police or security, just friends of Mr. Osodi. Did you see anything?' 'Pleased to meet you madam ... I was fast asleep when Agnes woke me up and said there were two jeeps outside ...' 'Army jeeps?' 'So I went to the window to look and she was right. There were two jeeps standing in the yard and by that time the people were banging on our neighbour's front door. Then after some time we could hear the door open.' 'Did they identify themselves? Did they say who they were?' 'I think they said they were from State Research Council.' 'Yes, that's what they said. And we heard him say that he was coming before he opened the door.' 'Yes?' 'We were not sure that they were soldiers. You know how armed robbers can sometimes say they are soldiers. So we were afraid to go out.' 'That's understandable. When exactly did this happen?' 'They were here exactly one-fifteen or so. And they left at around two-thirty. That was when they came out with our neighbour.' 'How many were they?' 'They plenty-o. Some came inside and some stayed outside. My husband said they must be up to ten but I didn't count.' 'Did you get any vehicle numbers?' 'I tried to but they parked under the umbrella tree, so the security light could not shine there for me to see the number well.' 'Was he rough-handled? Listen, you can speak without fear.' 'Unless inside the house. But outside they did everything quiet.' 'So there was no struggling or pushing or something like that ... outside?' 'No. I didn't see anything like that.' 'But our neighbour's hand was inside hand-cuff,' said the wife, 'and his face ...' 'We couldn't see very well sir. As I told you it was dark ...' 'His face?' asked Chris turning fully to the wife. 'We couldn't see very well whether his face was swell up. It was too dark. So we don't know whether it was because of the dark or that his face was swell up.' 'Thank you very much. You have given us the first solid information. You need not worry. We shall not mention you in any way.' 'Thank you sir, thank you madam. This our country na waa. Na only God go save person.' WHEN CHRIS FIRST HEARD through a friend's telephone call of MM's deportation at six p.m. the day before, he had tried to speak to Ikem but he had apparently gone out with Elewa. So the last time they talked together was the morning of the regicide story. Containing his irritation as much as possible he had wanted to know exactly what Ikem had said at the lecture. He fully expected an explosion from the other end in answer to his query but to his delight Ikem seemed quite upset that whatever he said had been so atrociously distorted and he was then drafting a stiff letter to the editor and even mentioned possible court action. Standing there now ineffectual, in the ruins of his flat, Chris's mind, locked out as it were on a barren corridor of inactivity, fluttered, panic-stricken, from one closed door to the next. 'I wonder if he did send the letter.' 'What letter?' 'To the Editor of the _Gazette__. It is important that they print his denial.' 'You think they will. With that odious fellow licking his lips. Anyway phone him and ask him why the letter has not appeared. He used to be a poodle of yours ...' 'We must reach Elewa. Who knows there may have been hints of this earlier in the day.' 'How?' 'I don't know really. But she was here till six.' 'The people came at one in the morning. Still I agree that Elewa ought to be told, anyway. Do you happen to know where she lives. No? Nor do I. The houseboy might know.' 'That's an idea.' The houseboy didn't know where she lived nor where she worked. 'Let's see, I believe she told me she was a sales-girl in an Indian or was it Lebanese shop. Textiles I think. But which particular shop ... I suppose we could try all the ones in the Yellow Pages ... But Elewa who? We don't know that either, do we? Oh well I am sure she will hear one way or another and come back here.' They left the flat so that Beatrice could go to work. Chris advised her not to make enquiries on the matter from her office but to leave everything to him. He spent the entire morning on the telephone. The mental immobility which the devastation in Ikem's flat had induced in him had now lifted completely. His mind got clearer on what he had to do as he went along doing it. Major Ossai was not available to speak to him and nobody else in the Directorate could help with the information he required. The President's Principal Secretary would not put him through but promised to call him back as soon as the President was free to talk to him. What was the subject of his discussion? Oh, but that is not a matter for the President. You want to speak to the Director of SRC. Then he called the Attorney-General who said he didn't know about it. 'But aren't you supposed to know?' 'Well, yes and no. If it is purely a matter of state security it could be tricky ... I will know ultimately of course, you know ...' Professor Okong hadn't heard; and the Chief Secretary to the Government had just this minute been told by the Attorney-General. Oh, well! No point continuing to search for the living among the dead! So he changed tack. It was clear that Major Samsonite Ossai and his boss were adopting a quiet line. Therefore he must embark on a massive publicizing of the abduction. He knew he could count on some of the representatives in Bassa of foreign news agencies, their press and radio. On the home front there was no comparable resource to lean on but there was the enormous potential of that great network nicknamed VOR, the Voice of Rumour, the despair of tyrants and shady dealers in high places. Before evening both systems, foreign and local seemed set to start buzzing in the interest of the abducted man. Then at six o'clock yet another Special Announcement from the Directorate of State Research Council was on the air: In the discharge of its duty in safeguarding the freedom and security of the State and of every law-abiding citizen of Kangan the State Research Council has uncovered a plot by unpatriotic elements in Kangan working in concert with certain foreign adventurers to destabilize the lawful government of this country. This dastardly plot was master-minded by Mr. Ikem Osodi until recently Editor of the government-owned _National Gazette__. Investigations by top security officers of SRC have revealed Mr. Osodi's involvement in three separate aspects of the plot: (1) He was the key link between the plotters in Kangan and their foreign collaborators. (2) He was the lynchpin between the plotters in Bassa and a group of disgruntled and unpatriotic chiefs in the Province of Abazon. (3) Under the guise of a public lecture at the University of Bassa on 26 September, Mr. Osodi furthered the aim of the plotters by inciting the students of the University to disaffection and rebellion against the government and the life of His Excellency the President and the peace and security of the State. In the early hours of this morning a team of security officers effected the arrest of Mr. Osodi in his official flat at 202 Kingsway Road in the Government Reservation Area and were taking him in a military vehicle for questioning at the SRC Headquarters when he seized a gun from one of his escorts. In the scuffle that ensued between Mr. Osodi and his guards in the moving vehicle Mr. Osodi was fatally wounded by gunshot. His Excellency has already appointed a high-level inquiry into the accident to be headed by the Chief of Staff, Major-General Ahmed Lango, with the directive to commence investigations immediately and to report within fourteen days. Meanwhile investigations are proceeding with a view to uncover all aspects of the plot and to bring to book any other person or persons, no matter how highly placed, involved in this treasonable conspiracy to divert our great and beloved country from its chosen path of orderly progress into renewed bloodshed and anarchy. Long live His Excellency the President! Long live the Republic of Kangan. Signed Colonel Johnson Ossai, Director of the State Research Council. That is the end of this Special Announcement. There will be a repeat of the announcement at seven o'clock. Chris threw a few things into his travelling bag while he waited nervously for Beatrice to arrive. As soon as she drove in he went out with the bag, locked the front door and left his house, as it turned out, for good. The decision to leave had little at first to do with fear for his own safety although that factor was to loom larger with every passing day. But right now in his mind the overwhelming issue which had been crystallizing even as the announcement was issuing from the box was how to counter the hideous lie. Not tomorrow, it could be too late, but now! As soon as he got to his first hideout he picked up the telephone and summoned two foreign correspondents to meet with him at eight o'clock that night. Then he went to the back room where a camp-bed and writing-table had been set up for him and began to draft his statement. His mind was strangely efficient and lucid; no detail seemed to escape him. A few minutes after he began working he re-emerged in the living-room where his host and Beatrice were making phone calls and told them to make sure that people understood that Ikem was not just wounded but dead. He was convinced that the drafters of the government statement had deliberately chosen a phrase which was popularly misunderstood in order to diffuse the shock of the news by revealing its full extent only in stages. Beatrice thought the theory a little ingenious but didn't argue the point. When she got home that night a little after eleven she found Elewa whom she had failed to locate all day, distraught, waiting in her flat. And, just as Chris had said, she had totally misunderstood the announcement! For a brief while she toyed with the idea of leaving her in her ignorance till morning. But she immediately realized that if she did it would not be necessarily out of consideration for Elewa but more likely from the cowardly fear of having to handle such a terrible task all by herself. And that decided her. The future she saw unfolding so relentlessly before them would demand brutal courage, not squeamishness, from the likes of Elewa and herself, from now on. And strange are the ways of deep emotion, Elewa proved the tougher of the two! One piercing cry that continued to reverberate in Beatrice's brain like a rifle-shot in salute to a fallen comrade and Elewa sat down, still and silent. It was Beatrice herself who then gave way to emollient tears she had reserved all evening making frenetic phone calls in Chris's secret command post. By late afternoon of the next day it was obvious that the State Research Council had begun to look for Chris. One of the foresighted steps he had taken was asking Beatrice to return to her flat and to go to work as usual in the morning and not try to make physical contact until further notice. Just before close of work her secretary asked her to take a call from the Director of SRC. She picked up the phone with deliberate slowness which gave her time to compose her voice and attitude. When she spoke she was cold and indifferent but not hostile. 'Colonel Johnson Ossai speaking.' 'I see. Anything I can do for you, Colonel?' 'Well, yes ... You see I have this very important message for Commissioner Oriko from His Excellency ... I have tried him at the Ministry of Information several times but he is not on seat. I have tried his house but no answer. I wonder ... erm ... if you know his ... erm ... whereabouts. It is ...' 'No I don't.' 'I see. I am sorry ...' 'Not at all, Colonel. Goodbye.' Meanwhile Chris had, in addition to the foreign correspondents, made very useful contact with other opinion-makers. He was particularly encouraged by his meeting with the President of the University of Bassa Students Union. For security reasons they had met not in his hideout but in a rendezvous in another area of the Government Reservation. But as it turned out this precaution proved quite unnecessary. The Students Union had been so incensed by the crude regicide story of the _National Gazette__ that copies of the newspaper were now regularly seized by students from newsvendors on campus and publicly burnt in the middle of Freedom Square. The Union had also written a long, angry letter to the Editor demanding an apology for the insult to students and their guest lecturer. Chris handed him a copy of the statement he had prepared and watched him as he read it. The paper soon began to tremble in his hands. When he returned it he drew the back of one hand across his eyes. He tried to speak but the words were at first blocked by a violent movement of his Adam's apple. 'I need a copy of this,' he managed finally. 'Can I copy it and return?' 'That's your copy,' said Chris, giving it back to him, 'if you need it.' 'Thank you, sir. We will run off two thousand copies tonight so that every student will have it first thing tomorrow morning. This government has now committed suicide.' 'Well, young man,' said Chris getting up and offering his hand as a signal for parting. 'I hope you are right. I certainly hope so. But we must not count too much on wickedness obliging us so readily ... I am glad we've had this chance to talk.' 'Thank you sir. You can count on us.' 'This country counts on you. Take care now.' CHRIS'S LAST VISITORS for the night were the two taxi-drivers. It had taken Elewa the whole morning and half the afternoon to locate one of them and arrange for them to meet with Chris at the same rendezvous. By the third morning the BBC which had already broadcast news of Ikem's death carried an interview between their Bassa correspondent and Chris who was described as a key member of the Kangan government and friend of the highly admired and talented poet, Ikem Osodi, whose reported death while in police custody had plunged the Military Government of this troubled West African State into deep crisis. In a voice full of emotion but steady and without shrillness Chris had described the official account of Ikem's death as 'patently false.' How could he be sure of that? Because Ikem was taken from his flat in handcuffs and so could not have wrenched a gun from his captors. So you are saying in effect that he was murdered? I am saying that there is no shred of doubt that Ikem Osodi was brutally murdered in cold blood by the security officers of this government. The correspondent was deported the next day. But by that time the Students Union had taken up the story and were demanding a judicial inquiry and the immediate dismissal of Colonel Ossai and his prosecution for murder. Two jeeploads of mobile police sent to apprehend the President and Secretary of the Union bungled the arrest; the young men gave them the slip. As if that was not dangerous enough other students began to taunt them as brainless morons. Now teasing the Kangan Mobile Police is worse than challenging a hungry Alsatian. They went berserk. But somehow, for reasons no one had been able to explain, they did not whip out their guns. Perhaps the bloody outcome of a similar invasion two years ago did after all leave its mark ... Perhaps in the thousand ages of divine-like patience even this rock of mindlessness will be dented by the regular dripping of roof water! With _koboko__ and truncheons they fell upon their fleeing victims chasing them into classrooms, the library, the chapel and into dormitories. In the Women's Hostel, which some of the attackers had originally gained in the blind accident of hot pursuit they all finally congregated and settled into a fearful orgy of revenge, compounding an ancient sex-feud with today's war of the classes. As ambulances screamed in later to collect the wounded and move them to hospital an announcement was made on the radio closing the university indefinitely and ordering all students out of the campus by six o'clock that very evening. THE BRITISH HIGH COMMISSIONER in Bassa went to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to protest about the deportation of two British nationals but instead was given a preview of a letter the security services were said to have intercepted and advised to return to his chancery and await a summons to the Ministry. The letter, a blue aerogramme, was addressed to Mr. John Kent and signed Dick. A section of it highlighted by a red line running down the margin read: Delighted particularly to have met that poet fellow who I believe edits the government daily. Splendid chap. Quiet astonishing in view of the image one had of African dictatorships to have had a chance of sitting around and hearing treason spoken so casually and the local dictator dismissed as a comic fool! And by such a prominent member of his own government. The editors of _The Times__ and the _Guardian__ could use a holiday in Bassa! I'm doing a short piece for the _Telegraph__. Chris could no longer move freely from one hideout to another because of a large number of army and police roadblocks springing up all over the city. Beatrice driving past his deserted official residence on recce saw a jeep stationed in the front yard and some riot policemen standing around. She drove on to the city centre, left her car in the parking lot opposite the Roman Catholic Cathedral, walked back across the street and made a call from a public telephone. She went to bed early that night but sleep came to her only in short, fitful spells. The third or fourth time she had woken up she thought she heard sounds coming from the direction of the spare bedroom. She got up and tiptoed there and could see at once from the doorway in the faint illumination filtering in from the security lights outside that she was sitting on the bed. 'Elewa!' she said switching on the ceiling light at the same time. 'You no fit carry on like this-o.' Beatrice had decided to look after her for a few days and had pushed her writingdesk against the wall and set up a bed for her. She had talked to her at length this evening, given her five milligrams of Valium and left her sleeping before retiring herself. And now here she was sitting on the bed her face a mirror of devastation. Her distracted look actually scared Beatrice. It was not mere grief. It was more. Something of the frightened child was showing strongly now--bewilderment, alarm, panic. 'You no fit carry on like this at all. If you no want save yourself then make you save the pickin inside your belle. You hear me? I done tell you this no be time for cry. The one wey done go done go. The only thing we fit do now is to be strong so that when the fight come we fit fight am proper. Wipe your eye. No worry. God dey.' Elewa exploded into loud crying now. Beatrice went and sat beside her and brought her head against her breast with one hand and began to tap her shoulder rhythmically with the other. When she had quietened her down she slowly disengaged her embrace and laid her gently on the pillow. She went to the wall and switched off the lights and returned to sit on the bed. 'Make you lie down,' said Elewa in a voice washed clear by tears. Beatrice complied and lay down on her back beside her in silence. After a while she slowly turned on her side and raised Elewa's head and ensconced it tenderly in the crook of her arm and began to tap a steady rhythm again on her shoulder. The door of memory was unlocked and she saw herself as a child tapping the only doll she ever had, a wooden thing with undeveloped hands, a rigid, erect trunk and the stylized face of the masked maiden spirit. Elewa's chest, richly proportioned, heaved spasmodically like a child's in the aftermath of crying. In the end Beatrice could tell from her deep breathing that she had at last floated into sleep broken now and again by sudden violent starts of nightmare which mercifully did not wake her up. She needed the sleep, poor child. Soon she herself was dozing off. The car lights first, sensed in the vague indeterminacy of unformed dreams, and then the harsh crunch of tyres on the pebbled driveway. She sprang to her feet. Out of the glass louvres she could see three jeeps unmistakable in the night from the sinister, narrow, closely-set eyes of headlamps. Her heart thumping she rushed to her bedroom, snatched a tough pair of jeans from her wardrobe, leapt into them, zipped up and belted. Then she searched and pulled out another pair. Elewa was standing beside her. 'Put this on quick!' Then she pulled out two dressing gowns ... A number of heavy knocks on her door ... 'Miss Okoh. This is State Security. Open up at once!' She put on her dressing gown, helped Elewa into hers and ordered her back into the spare bedroom with hand-and-head gestures. 'Miss Okoh. This is the last warning. Open the door now. State Security.' 'I am coming.' 'Well, hurry up!' She took the bunch of keys from the sideboard and began to unchain the iron grills. Her hands were shaking so violently she couldn't get the key into the keyhole. Elewa snatched the bunch from her, turned the padlock and unchained the heavy grill. Then Beatrice shocked into calmness by this action snatched back the keys and, whispering 'Go inside!' to Elewa who ignored the command, turned the lock in the steel and glass crittall door. It was wrenched out of her grip and swung outwards. Then a huge soldier rushed in pushing the two women aside so powerfully to his right and left in a dry breast-stroke movement that sent Elewa, slight as a reed, down on the floor on her bottom. 'Easy, Sergeant!' This from an officer who followed less dramatically. Three others came in after the officer while the rest stayed at the door. 'Miss Okoh?' 'Yes.' 'I am sorry to disturb you at this hour. But I have instructions to search your flat. May I proceed?' 'Anything in particular you are looking for?' 'What kind nonsense question be dat.' 'OK, Sergeant. I will do the talking. So keep quiet! Well, yes, Miss Okoh, there are certain things we are looking for but it is not our practice to discuss them first. Incidentally I advise that anybody in the flat should come out right away. All the exits are guarded and anyone trying to escape will be shot. Is that clear? Now we will proceed.' He deployed his men to different locations in the flat with the silent gestures of a field commander. Thereafter he went from one sector to another supervising the operations. Beatrice followed him at a discreet distance. The red-eyed sergeant who was given charge of Beatrice's bedroom was executing it with a vengeance. He had pulled out the bedsheets off the bed and thrown them on the floor where he walked all over them as he frenziedly darted from one object to another. It was fortunate that Beatrice never learnt to lock suitcases and things. So the sergeant's fury had nothing to wrench open. He merely spilt clothes everywhere. The officer came in and asked him again to go easy and picked up the bedsheets himself and threw them back on the bed. As the captain turned his back Beatrice caught in the eye of the sergeant a flash from the utmost depths of contempt and hatred. 'Miss Okoh, excuse my asking. Who is this young lady?' 'She is Elewa ... my girlfriend.' 'Your _girl__ friend? Interesting. What does she do?' 'What do you mean?' 'I mean does she have a job?' 'Yes. She is a sales-girl in a Lebanese shop.' 'Does she live with you normally?' 'No, she is just visiting.' 'I see.' Elewa's eyes darted from one to the other as they discussed her like the seller and prospective buyer of some dumb animal brought to the market. Her grief had temporarily been displaced by these strange events now going on around her. In her oversize jeans and dressing gown she looked almost comical. She was not walking around with Beatrice and the officer but had taken her position on a dining-chair in the living-room annexe. Beatrice, worried about her fall, asked as many times as she came through the living-room how she felt. No trouble, she would answer. Perhaps it was the Valium making her unusually calm. In Elewa's room the soldier detailed there was looking through papers and books on the table when Beatrice trailing the officer came in again. 'Are you looking for books too?' 'Everything,' replied the officer on behalf of the soldier. 'My people have a saying which my father used often. A man whose horse is missing will look everywhere even in the roof.' He searched everywhere for his missing horse for about an hour, apologized for disturbing Beatrice's sleep, saluted and left. What kind of enigma was this? Could there really be even one decent young man in the Security Services or indeed the entire Kangan Army and Police. Or was this the ultimate evil--the smiling face of Mephistopheles in the beguiling habit of a monk? Safer by far to believe the worst. FOURTEEN AS SHE WAS drowsily getting dressed for work the bedside telephone rang. Startled, she grabbed it on the second ring. A voice said: 'Miss Okoh?' 'Yes. Who is that?' Her heart was thumping and the telephone in her unsteady hand bobbed up and down against her ear. Silence at the other end. Was he gone? Then: 'Never mind who. I know where the horse is. But I don't want to find him. Get him moved. Before tonight.' He rang off. Or was he cut off? She stood transfixed, the handset in her hand vibrating still against her ear. Hoping the voice would return? Had they been intercepted? Slowly she replaced and sank with leaden weariness into her unmade bed. Move him? Was it a trap? To lure him into the soldier-infested streets? Who exactly was this fellow? Could he be genuine? Who in God's name could one ask? Tears of loneliness began to form in her eyes. She got up, wiped them and blew her nose and then tiptoed to Elewa's room. She was sleeping beautifully, childlike, beguiled perhaps by a dream in which the bad news had not yet been heard, where what happened here had not yet happened. She tiptoed out again leaving her to snatch what strength she could from the short reprieve of her dreams. She picked up her handbag and went alone in search of a safe telephone. Later in the office she had a restless day wondering whether any of the score of accidents that could happen to the move had happened, and which. Only one was needed. Just as they say of bullets ... The worst thing was sitting there so inactive signing daft letters, and not knowing what was going on. Should she risk a quick phone call from another office just to know, even without saying a word, whether his host, already gone to work when she had transmitted the message, had been reached to come back to arrange the move. And again that officer, was he genuine? Could anyone be genuine in these shark-infested waters? What then could his game be? Oh God! But why couldn't she just slip into one of the offices down the corridor, dial the number and see who picks up the phone? But Chris would be mad; he had been so insistent that she must not ... And if she simply dialled the number and didn't speak, that could cause panic at the other end and might lead to a false step ... Oh my God! She left her office like a bird released from its cage, on the dot of three-thirty. (Chris had also insisted that she must not leave before closing time on his account because her movements would then attract attention. Damn his efficiency!) She did not head straight for home but went ostensibly shopping. From the crowded parking-lot, however, she went elsewhere than the shops. There was a sprightliness in her walk as she returned to the parking-lot that told all her news. She decided to treat herself to a phial of Blue Grass and went into the shops. Instead of one bottle she bought two; one for Elewa. Then she picked up a loaf of bread and a few other groceries and set out jauntily for home. At the car-park she deposited her bag of purchases on the bonnet of her car and unzipped her handbag for the key. She searched one compartment and then the other. Her ill-used heart began to palpitate again. She told herself to keep calm, take a deep breath, and search the bag more thoroughly. She did, and even emptied the contents on the bonnet. But the little bunch was not there. She half-ran all the hundred or so yards to the public telephone. A man was making a call. She knocked on the glass door and tried to slide it open. The man interrupted his conversation to protest. 'I am sorry. I'm looking for my car key.' 'There is no car key here,' said the man angrily as he wrenched the door from her hand, shut it firmly and resumed his conversation, after a hissing sound longer than men generally could manage. She returned dejectedly to the car after she had retraced her steps with mounting hopelessness through the various stops she had made inside the shop and the different cashiers' stations where she had brought out her wallet from her handbag and made payments. Everyone, especially the perfumery girls, remembered her, but not her bunch of keys. She was tired; hugely tired. The sun's routine oppression had changed all at once into a special act of vindictiveness against her in reprisal perhaps for the nervous energy she had just displayed instead of the languor decreed from above. All around her in the parking-lot she saw vaguely in slow motion hundreds, more wise than she, who obeyed and prospered. She turned around for no apparent reason and took a look inside the car, and saw the keys dangling from the key-hole. Transports of joy! Now she could go home and even if she failed to locate her spares--which had become a major fear since she had begun considering strategies--she could bring a mechanic, even a car-thief, and force the doorlock or do something with the glass, and move the car. Smiling, she went in search of a taxi. Was it happiness about the keys or something deeper, a response called up by the crisis in which she and her friends were enmeshed? Whatever it was, she struck up a conversation with the taxi-driver and very soon she was learning things she didn't know, about the death of Ikem, about the missing Commissioner for Information and about the planned meeting tomorrow of the Taxi Drivers Union 'to put their mouth into this nonsense story' of Ikem's death. 'If you get somewhere to go make you go today. Tomorrow no taxi go run.' By the time they got to her flat the rapport between Beatrice and the driver was such that although she took a little time finding her spare keys he did not mind in the least. The beer she offered him to make the time pass more pleasantly he put away under his dashboard until his break-time. He promised to bring the empty bottle back tomorrow on his way to the meeting. 'Don't worry about the bottle,' said Beatrice. 'Why I no go worry? I be monkey wey dem say to give im water no hard but to get your tumbler back?' Beatrice burst into laughter as she climbed back into the car for the return journey to the parking-lot. Even the joker had to laugh then at his own joke. CHRIS'S LAST HIDEOUT had been raided as promised at midnight. Beatrice had got ready quite early but had had to wait until there was adequate traffic on the roads before venturing out to put a call through to the house. The conversation was brief and undetailed, without proper names. 'Any visitors?' 'Yes they came at twelve.' 'Any problems?' 'None so far.' 'So far?' 'Well, none really. Nothing at all.' 'Thank God.' Click! She went into her flat as she sometimes did, quietly by the kitchen entrance. Elewa was at the table dipping dry bread in a mug of Ovaltine while Agatha watched her leaning on the doorway between the kitchen and the dining-annexe. 'What are you watching her for? And what sort of breakfast is this? No eggs ... no margarine ...' 'But she no ask me for egg or margarine.' 'She no ask you?' 'Make you no worry, BB. This one done do.' 'Agatha, you are a very stupid girl and a very wicked girl ... Get out of my way!' She pushed past her back into the kitchen, broke and whisked three eggs for an omelette. While it simmered she brought breakfast things out of the refrigerator to the table--margarine, marmalade, honey, orange juice, milk. Then she sat down and insisted that Elewa eat the egg and drink the fresh orange juice. She literally waited on her not just because her grief entitled her to it but she wanted her solicitude to be a ringing rebuke to Agatha who had made no attempt to conceal her resentment at having to serve someone she clearly felt, judging from the contempt in her eyes and the way she curled her lips, was no better than a servant herself. After the first surge of anger Beatrice found herself feeling for the first time for this poor, twisted, desiccated, sanctimonious girl something she had never before thought of extending to her--pity. Yes, she thought, her Agatha deserved to be pitied; this girl who danced and raved about salvation from dawn to dusk every Saturday, who distributed free leaflets (she had once even sneaked up to Chris when Beatrice stepped out of the room and given him one). Yes, this Agatha who was so free with leaflets dripping with the saving blood of Jesus and yet had no single drop of charity in her own anaemic blood. As she drank her coffee and nibbled at the bread and omelette she was having just to keep Elewa company and make sure she had a little something nourishing and needful for her condition she wondered why Agatha should want to be so beastly to the girl. Of course being a servant could not be fun. Beatrice knew that. She had never belittled the problem or consciously looked down on anyone because she was a servant, so help her God. For she was sensitive enough and intelligent enough to understand, and her literary education could not but have sharpened her perception of the evidence before her eyes: that in the absurd raffle-draw that apportioned the destinies of post-colonial African societies two people starting off even as identical twins in the morning might quite easily find themselves in the evening one as President shitting on the heads of the people and the other a nightman carrying the people's shit in buckets on his head. So how could a girl like Beatrice, intelligent, compassionate, knowing that fact of our situation look down on another less lucky and see more to it than just that--blind luck? But there was more to it. There had to be. Look at Elewa. Was she not as unlucky as Agatha in the grand capricious raffle? A half-literate sales-girl in a shop owned by an Indian; living in one room with a petty-trader mother deep in the slums of Bassa. Why had she not gone sour? Why did she radiate this warmth and attraction and self-respect and confidence? Why did it seem so natural to install her in the spare bedroom and not, like Agatha, in the servant's quarters? She was Ikem's girl, true. But was that all? And how come Ikem singled her out in the first place to be his girl from the millions just as unlucky as herself? There was something in her that even her luckless draw could not remove. That thing that drew Ikem to her, and for which she must be given credit. Ikem! Oh yes, Ikem. Provocative, infuriating, endearing Ikem! He was, had to be, at the root of these unusual musings! She recalled the last visit he had paid her in this flat. Though she was to see him a couple of times again subsequently, the last time only the other day at Chris's place when they had all watched the news of his suspension together, that last visit here at her flat had risen with his death to dominate her consciousness of him and driven earlier and even later memories firmly into the background. It was perhaps the strong, spiritual light of that emergent consciousness that gave Elewa, carrying as it turned out a living speck of him within her, this new luminosity she seemed to radiate which was not merely a reflection of common grief which you could find anywhere any hour in Kangan, but a touch, distinct, almost godlike, able to transform a half-literate, albeit good-natured and very attractive, girl into an object of veneration. But even more remarkable was the way this consciousness was now, at the ebbtide of her anger impinging on despised Agatha, who had wilfully placed herself until now beyond the reach of Beatrice's sympathy by her dry-as-dust, sanctimonious, bornagain ways; yes, impinging on her of all people and projecting on to the screen of the mind a new image of her; and in the background the narrator's voice coming through and declaiming: _It is now up to you women to tell us what has to be done. And Agatha is surely one of you.__ And do you know what? Perhaps it might even be said that by being so clearly, so unpleasantly, so pig-headedly unhappy in her lot Agatha by her adamant refusal to be placated may be rendering a service to the cause more valuable than Elewa's acceptance; valuable for keeping the memory of oppression intact, constantly burnished and ready. How about that? It was Agatha's habit to cry for hours whenever Beatrice said as much as boo to her; and Beatrice's practice to completely ignore her. But today, after she had deposited the used plates in the sink, Beatrice turned to where Agatha sat with her face buried in her hands on the kitchen-table and placed her hand on her heaving shoulder. She immediately raised her head and stared at her mistress in unbelief. 'I am sorry Agatha.' The unbelief turned first to shock and then, through the mist of her tears, a sunrise of smiles. THE VOICE HAD BECOME expansive, even self-indulgent. Two calls in one day! In the morning it was to give her full marks for moving the horse; but, if the horse was still in Bassa, to impress upon her that the city was not a safe environment for him. So she had better be thinking quite soon of a cross-country gallop. 'It's not me you should worry about; I can promise never to find a horse. It's the others who are more efficient than myself in the matter of finding horses.' Completely bemused at the end of this strange mixture of whimsy and deadliness Beatrice found herself saying the words: 'Are you genuine?' which rang almost as strangely in her ear as the communication that had given rise to it. He gave no answer. Perhaps he was already half-way to replacing his telephone and didn't hear the question. Or perhaps he heard but did not wish to put himself in the vulnerable position of being questioned. If so, fair enough. One should not look a gift-horse in the mouth. The fellow wasn't hired by her as her private detective, so he was within his rights to lay down conditions for his freely volunteered assistance. Assistance, did she say? So she was already assuming he was on her side, already taking him for granted. So early in the day. Careful now, Beatrice, careful. How did her people say it? Don't disparage the day that still has an hour of light in its hand. That evening he called again to answer the question. 'You asked was I genuine? If by that you mean do I ride horses or do I play polo the answer is an emphatic no. But if you mean do I like horses, yes. I am a horse-fancier.' Click! So he did hear it. Only he needed the time, a whole day, to work out a clever answer. Oh, well. She couldn't really complain ... though she must admit to being a little troubled by the tone of sportiveness creeping into his manner. But again, why not? Why should this unconventional benefactor be judged by her own sedate sense of seriousness. Was she forgetting that kind though he might have been to her on one occasion he was still a practising hangman? And what could be more natural than for a man in his profession to have a somewhat unorthodox sense of humour--gallows humour, in fact! Two other things that happened that day compounded Beatrice's anxiety. The _National Gazette__ had come out in the morning with a strange story: The Commissioner for Information, Mr. Christopher Oriko, who had not been seen in his office or his residence for the past one week had according to unconfirmed reports left the country in a foreign airliner bound for London disguised as a Reverend Father and wearing a false beard. What were they up to now? Was this a smoke-screen behind which they hoped to eliminate their second victim less messily than the first? Then at six o'clock came a police statement declaring Mr. Christopher Oriko, Commissioner for Information wanted by security officers in connection with the recent coup plot and calling on anyone who had information concerning his whereabouts to contact the nearest police station and warned citizens that concealing information about a coup plotter was as serious as failing to report a coup plot or taking part in a coup plot; and the penalty for each was death. This announcement had not come as a complete surprise to Beatrice. Still to hear those idiotic accusations made against the backdrop of that unflattering full-face picture of Chris dug up from God knows where staring out at you from the screen injected a chill into one's circulation, even without the ominous death sting at the end. She and Elewa sat in reflective silence after the announcement. Agatha who seemed to have heard it from the kitchen and moved up to the door was leaning on the doorway, silently. Then the telephone rang as though on cue shattering the dramatic silence. Elewa sat up, her head held high like a deer that sniffs danger, its erect ears waiting for a confirming rustle. But no stealthy sound came and no flashing movement, and she sat back again. Beatrice's change of countenance, the tone and words of her half of the conversation had dispelled the air of dread which had lately attended telephone calls. The conversation was indeed about the announcement but whoever Beatrice was talking to seemed merely to be expressing friendly concern. When she dropped the telephone Elewa and Agatha had been having a quiet discussion of their own on the matter. 'Madam, make you no worry at all,' said Agatha. 'Whether they look from here to Jericho, they no go find am. By God's power.' 'Amin,' replied Elewa. 'Na so we talk.' FIFTEEN CHRIS MEANWHILE had been weaving a nest of heady activity in the circumscribed quarters of his retreat. If only Beatrice had had more direct access to him in those few days of his rapid metamorphosis into the new career of prized quarry she might have learnt to be less surprised by the strange behaviour of his hunter; for even in his harried run Chris had still left himself scope for heightening the drama of the chase. This apparent luxury made his tight corners not only more enjoyable to him but on occasion went so far as to offer him the illusion that he had turned hunter from hunted; that he had become the very spider manning a complicated webwork of toils and not the doomed fly circling in orbits of seeming freedom that nevertheless narrowed imperceptibly to a fatal impingement. Was this a necessary part of the psychology of hot pursuit that it will deceive even its own purpose, not to talk of the predicament of its victim, into liberallooking sportiveness and fairplay? Chris's new network was fastened on the support of friends who harboured him in spare rooms and Boys' Quarters and even, on one dramatic occasion, pitched him through a loose board into the steamy darkness of the ceiling. This hide-and-seek gave everyone concerned a nice conspiratorial feeling of being part of an undertaking admittedly risky but still far short of menacing. However, after the police announcement spelling out the death penalty for everything including this kind of game, Chris and his current host had a serious talk together and decided that they could not rule out the chances that one or two people who had played a role in the affair so far might be frightened by this turn of events into quietly informing against him to buy their own peace. So the need for him to move out of Bassa entirely became suddenly urgent. But it was going to be tricky and there was no way it could be accomplished in one step in the short time he had. So it was arranged that he and his aide-de-camp, Emmanuel, should make a preliminary move out of the Government Reservation Area to the northern slums under the care of the taxi-driver, Braimoh. Emmanuel Obete was the President of the Students Union who after a couple of visits had brought his bag along one afternoon and simply stayed on. 'Why have you come to me?' Chris asked him, not on the first day nor the second but as they ate a hurried breakfast of fried plantains and corn pap with his host on the third morning. 'For protection,' said Emmanuel who was revealing a new side of himself as a clown of sorts. Chris and his host looked at each other and laughed. 'Do your people have a proverb about a man looking for something inside the bag of a man looking for something?' Emmanuel laughed in his turn and said no they didn't ... but wait ... they did have something that resembled it: about digging a new hole to get sand to fill an old one. 'He is something else,' said Chris to his friend. And he did not trouble the young man again about his reasons. Emmaunuel was also a fugitive wanted by the police. But being of only middling importance in police estimation he was not given the VIP treatment of having his waitand-take picture on television. A troublesome student union official was nothing new to the Kangan Police, and they were not about to make a song and dance about him. 'Now I want to tell you the real reason I came to you,' said Emmanuel later in the day. 'I see,' said Chris. 'Actually the one you gave in the morning was good enough for me. What is it this time?' 'Well, this time it is because the security people are so daft they will look for me everywhere except where you are.' 'There you go again underrating the state security. Very dangerous, you know. Better to overrate your enemy than to underrate him. OK, look at this matter of the fatal gunshot. Anyone who can come up with that kind of thing can't be a complete fool.' 'I don't believe they came up with it, sir. Pure accident, that's all.' Emmanuel's low opinion of the army and police was matched only by his dismal estimate of Kangan journalists. Between the two he would give a slight edge in fact to the security officers. And fortunately for him the incredible ease with which he had planted the story of Chris's escape to London in the _National Gazette__ came in handy as indisputable proof. He, Chris and their host had such a laugh when the news appeared; and Chris had to admit, shamefacedly as a former Editor of the _Gazette__, that the affair put the journalistic profession in Kangan in a very poor light indeed. 'Of course it would not have happened under your editorship or Ikem's,' said Emmanuel in a tone that was not entirely free of certain impish ambiguity. 'Thank you, Emmanuel. Such gallantry.' 'No, I mean every word, sir.' And it seemed, this time, he did. But Chris had some difficulty getting the matter off his mind. Long after the merriment over Emmanuel's brilliant success had subsided he kept repeating to himself: 'One telephone call! From a senior Customs Officer who for obvious reasons would rather not reveal his identity! Unbelievable!' Chris's disguise for his first hop was nothing as fanciful as Emmanuel's priest's cassock. He wore Braimoh's everyday clothes and cap to match, and a few smudges of pot-black on his face and neck and arms to tone down a complexion too radiant for his new clothes or pretended calling as a retail dealer in small motor-car parts. The one-week growth of beard he had nurtured just in case, was discarded as not too great a success, especially when his host suggested, half-seriously, that the Reverend Father's beard in Emmanuel's rather more successful fiction might have the result of drawing police attention instinctively to people's chins for some days to come. Braimoh had two passengers in the back seat of his old cab when he arrived to pick up Chris for the critical journey to the north of the city. His estimate was eight or nine odd security road-blocks to cross. Chris said good afternoon to the two strangers behind and took the front seat beside the driver. Before driving away Braimoh reached into the untidy junk in his glove-box and brought out three kolanuts and offered them to Chris. 'Make you de chew am for road. Anybody wey see you de knack am so go think say you never chop breakfast.' The two men behind laughed rather a lot at this and Chris not being sure whether they were people who laughed much ordinarily or hid malice behind laughter cast a questioning glance at Braimoh, even as he reached for the gift. 'Dem two na my people. No worry.' Chris took the proffered kolanuts, and thanked Braimoh. Then he gave one to the two men behind as though in appeasement and put the others in his pocket. Seeing where they had been fished out of he would need to wash them before eating. Emmanuel darted out for a quick goodbye and vanished again behind the main house into the Boys' Quarters. It had been agreed that he would travel separately to rejoin Chris later. They passed the first three check-points without trouble. The soldiers and police looked tired and waved cars through rather inattentively. Chris was almost certain that Emmanuel's _Gazette__ story must be more than marginally responsible for thus putting the law off their guard. He was something else, that boy Emmanuel. Why did we not cultivate such young men before now? Why, we did not even know they existed if the truth must be told! We? Who are we? The trinity who thought they owned Kangan as BB once unkindly said? Three green bottles. One has accidentally fallen; one is tilting. Going, going, bang! Then we becomes I, becomes imperial We. The traffic was beginning to slow down at the big bend in the road just before the Three Cowrie Bridge. Another check-point, no doubt. Stupid fellows the police; they would choose the approaches to a bridge to disrupt traffic! At long last Braimoh cleared the corner, and ran full tilt into it! This was no ordinary check-point but a major combined army and police operation. There were two military jeeps by the roadside and three police patrol-cars flashing their roof-lamps. Ahead, passengers were being ordered out of vehicles. Braimoh panicked and made the first move of a hasty U-turn, which was a serious error considering the flashing patrol-cars waiting to give chase! The man behind Chris shouted to Braimoh to get back into line, and he promptly complied. But it would seem his ill-considered move had already been noticed. 'Oga come out quick! Make we use leg.' Chris was out of the car like a shot and so was the man who had spoken. They were on the kerb side of the road, fortunately. 'Quick, make we de go!' As they walked smartly away from their car towards the bridge the soldier who seemed to have noticed Braimoh's suspicious move was coming briskly towards them. Chris was watching him through the corner of his eye until they drew level. The soldier stopped. 'Hey, stop there!' he shouted. Chris and his companion halted on the sidewalk and turned to him, standing on the road. His face was scarred by three heavy marks on either side. He had accompanied his order with the unslinging of his automatic weapon. The width of a car separated him from Chris and his companion. 'Where you de go?' 'We de go Three Cowrie Market.' 'Wetin de inside that bag? Bring am here.' Chris's companion walked down the kerb between two cars and opened his dirty shopping bag for the soldier to inspect. 'You there, come down here. Wetin be your name?' 'Sebastian,' replied Chris, using the name of his steward from instant inspiration. 'Sebastian who?' He didn't know. But luckily he realized quickly enough that it didn't much matter. 'Sebastian Ojo.' 'What work you de do?' 'He de sell motor part.' 'Na you I ask? Or na you be him mouth?' 'I de sell motor parts,' said Chris. 'How you de sell motor part and then come de march for leg?' 'Him car knock engine.' 'Shurrup! Big mouth. I no ask you!' But he had already diverted the scorching fire away from Chris and given him a little respite just when he was beginning to wilt and quiver a bit at the knees. His right hand, heavy and idle beside him, stirred into life and went to his trouser pocket where it found one of the kolanuts and brought it out. The soldier's eye caught it and lit up. Chris split the nut and gave the bigger half to him and put the other into his own mouth. The soldier took the offering eagerly and crunched it with noisy greed. 'Thank you brother,' he said, fixing his gaze on him and squinting in what might be an effort of memory. 'Na only poor man de sabi say him brother never chop since morning. The big oga wey put poor man for sun no de remember. Because why? Him own belle done full up with cornflake and milik and omlate.' He resumed his squint at Chris and then tapped his forehead. 'I think say I done see you before before.' 'Sometime you buy small something for repair your machine for him shop?' said Chris's companion. 'Which machine? I tell you say I get machine?' 'Make you no mind. No condition is permnent. You go get. Meself as I de talk so, you think say I get machine? Even common bicycle I no get. But my mind strong that one day I go jump bicycle, jump machine and land inside motor car! And somebody go come open door for me and say _yes sir!__ And I go carry my belle like woman we de begin to pregnant small and come sitdon for owner-corner, take cigarette put for mouth, no more kolanut, and say to driver _comon move!__ I get strong mind for dat. Make you get strong mind too, everything go allright.' The soldier now wore a wistful smile which sat strangely on his savaged face. Across the bridge they walked leisurely, waiting for Braimoh and his lone passenger to get through their own ordeal. Chris's spirits had returned to such a degree that a certain jauntiness was discernible in his walk. He even suggested to his companion that walking through check-points would seem to be their best bet from now on. 'You think you no go forget your job again?' his companion asked teasingly. 'When you no fit talk again that time, fear come catch me proper and I begin pray make this man no go introduce himself as Commissioner of Information!' 'Me Commissioner? At all. Na small small motor part na him I de sell. Original and Taiwan.' 'Ehe! Talkam like that. No shaky-shaky mouth again. But oga you see now, to be big man no hard but to be poor man no be small thing. Na proper wahala. No be so?' 'Na so I see-o. I no know before today say to pass for small man you need to go special college.' His companion liked that and laughed long and loud. 'Na true you talk, oga. Special College. Poor Man Elementary Cerftikate!' They walked along merrily discussing in confidential tones their recent success. Chris wondered why the soldier had stopped them in the first place. Had he noticed them get down from the taxi? 'At all!' said his companion. 'Make I tell you why he stop us? Na because of how you de walk as to say you fear to kill ant for road. And then you come again take cornercorner eye de look the man at the same time. Nex time make you march for ground with bold face as if to say your father na him get main road.' 'Thank you,' said Chris. 'I must remember that ... To succeed as small man no be small thing.' SIXTEEN THE JOURNEY TO THE NORTH began five days later. The choice of Abazon as sanctuary came quite naturally. At the purely sentimental level it was Ikem's native province which, although he had rarely spent much time there in recent years, still remained in a curious paradoxical way the distant sustainer of all his best inspirations, so that going there now in his death became for Chris and Emmanuel something of a pilgrimage. Then it was a province of unspecified and generalized disaffection to the regime. One could indeed call it natural guerrilla country; not of course in the literal sense of suggesting planned armed struggle which would be extravagantly far-fetched as yet, but in the limited but important meaning of a place where, to borrow the watchword of a civil service poster, you could count on having your secrets kept secret. And lastly, Braimoh's wife, Aina was, as it turned out, a native of southern Abazon and Braimoh had volunteered to personally escort the distinguished refugee and hand him over to his in-laws up there for safe-keeping. All these attractions of Abazon had of course to be set against the one considerable disadvantage of being a place where the regime might be sleeping with one eye open especially since the death of Ikem and the ugly eruption of a new crisis over the government's refusal to turn over his body to his people for burial under the provocative pretext that investigations were still proceeding into the circumstances of his death! The night before the journey had been quite extraordinary. Beatrice, at her own insistence, had been brought by Braimoh in a friend's taxi through devious routes to say farewell to Chris. She wore for the occasion long-discarded clothes fished out of a big, red canvas bag in which she threw odds and ends awaiting the visit of the Salvation Army collector. With her came Elewa. It was to have been a brief visit after which the two young women would take another taxi to Elewa's mother's place a couple of kilometres away and spend the night there to avoid a late journey back to her flat at the GRA which might attract undue attention. But the strain and the confusing events of recent days and nights which Beatrice had borne all on her own with such intrepidity seemed all of a sudden to assume an unbearable heaviness on her shoulders at this tantalizing reunion. Why should she accept this role of a star-crossed lover in a cheap, sentimental movie waving frantically from the window of an express train at her young man at his window in another train hurtling away on opposite tracks into a different dark tunnel? And so she rebelled with a desperate resolve grounded on a powerful premonition that Chris and she had tonight come to a crossroads beyond which a new day would break, unpredictable, without precedent; a day whose market wares piled into the long basket on her head as she approached the gates of dawn would remain concealed to the very last moment. And so, timidly for once, Beatrice chose to hang by a thread to the days she had known, to spin out to infinite lengths the silken hours and minutes of this last familiar night. 'I shall stay here till morning,' she pronounced from that rock-like resolve just as Braimoh peeped through the door a second time for instructions about a taxi. Glances were exchanged all round but no one dared to demur. Rather, new arrangements were quickly taken in hand, debated and concluded around Beatrice's now-aloof stance while she, immobile as a goddess in her shrine, her arms across her breasts, stared away fixedly into the middle distance. She heard the debate and the conclusions remotely: Elewa would take Emmanuel to her mother's place in the taxi; Braimoh would pack the five children off to sleep in a neighbour's house ... 'Oh no no no!' said Chris suddenly out of a reverie, stamping his foot firmly on the linoleum-covered floor. All eyes turned to him but he merely went on shaking his head for a while longer before saying quite decisively that the children must not be moved. The thinking which had produced this sharp reaction had gone somewhat as follows: I arrived here and failed to prevent Braimoh and Aina his wife from abandoning their matrimonial bed to me and going out every night to sleep God-knows-where. I'll be damned if their five children will now be ejected from their floor because of Beatrice. He leaned over and explained these thoughts to her in excited whispers. Her response was instantaneous. Her mind and all her thoughts had been so totally focussed on Chris's metamorphosis from disembodied voice back into flesh and blood that she had left herself no room whatever to consider such things as beds and floors and at what and whose cost. Now she spoke as firmly as Chris in favour of the children. She went further to say, in sincere atonement, that as far as she was concerned the chair on which she sat was all she needed for the night. Later, she had to be summoned several times by Chris before she left that chair and, stepping over the sleeping children, hung her head-tie on a nail driven into the wall and went over to the bed. She was still suffering a sense of shame for her thoughtlessness. But how was she to have known that by simply obeying an impulse to stay close to Chris this one night before a journey into the unknown she was selfishly putting out a poor family? Why did no one tell her? Or was she, as her people say, just to sniff her finger and know? Then who was to tell her? Braimoh? Look, Miss, my wife and I go out to pass the night on a neighbour's floor while our five children sleep here on this floor; so you can't stay here. Or Chris? Yes, Chris the Information man should have informed, not _after__ but _before__. But how was even he to know the impulse bubbling inside her and erupting in her pronouncement? The fault is then hers. Although she had not consciously thought about it she must have made the assumption in some inattentive zone of her mind that one or two of all those doors that gave into the long odoriferous corridor running through the belly of this airless block-house must lead into other rooms used by Braimoh and his family. Why did she make that assumption? Surely everyone had heard that large families of the urban poor lived in single windowless rooms. Did she imagine then that for her that piece of information would stay in the domain of hearsay, that it would never fall to her luck to encounter it in a living family and even share its meagre resources for a single night? Chris called out again to her from the bed screened by two large curtains of cheap cotton print hung on a rope that stretched from one wall to the other with a sag in the middle that made one want to get up and pull the rope tighter around the nail on which it was fastened. She picked her steps carefully through the confusion of young sleeping bodies on straw mats on the floor and gained the bed. She had brought pyjamas in her picnic bag but had left the bag unopened beside her chair. Sitting now on the edge of the bed she took off her blouse and hung it on the sagging curtain-rope. She then loosed her _lappa__ from her waist and retied it above the breast and lay down beside Chris. Their love-making that night was cramped by distractions. At least two of the children lying on the floor beyond the cotton screen--a boy and a girl--could easily possess enough street-lore to know if something was going on and what. Then there was the multiple-pitched squealing of the bed at the slightest change of position. There was one door to the room; it led into the long central corridor and was bolted from inside. There was also a tiny plain-board window which gave directly on to the bed and opened out to a huge, choked and stagnant drain. So it had to be kept shut at all times to keep down the smell and the mosquitoes. But enough of both still got in. As soon as the lone light-bulb in the room was turned off the mosquitoes began to sing to the ear which was always worse than their bite and, some would say, even worse than the bite of bedbugs which soon followed the mosquitoes in a night-long assault on these smooth-skinned intruders from the GRA. No wonder Chris looked so haggard and worn-out, thought Beatrice. But although these specific distractions surely must have worked their own havoc on the rites of this closing night to a long drama that had drawn together more than these two survivors in enactments of love and friendship, betrayal and death, there was something deeper than the harassment of heat and bugs laying a restraining hand on the shoulder of the chief celebrant. Chris had noticed it from the very moment she had walked in that evening that she carried with her a strong aura of that other Beatrice whom he always described in fearful jest as goddessy. And then lying in bed and summoning her to join him and watching her as she finally rose from her chair in the thin darkness of the room she struck him by her stately stylized movement like the Maiden Spirit Mask coming in to the arena, erect, disdainful, high-coiffured, unravished yet by her dance. She did not rebuff him. But neither did she offer more than the obligatory demands of her ritual. He understood perfectly and soon afterwards led in an effort to divert their minds to childhood fable. The mosquito, which Chris repeatedly but unsuccessfully tried to swat with an old shirt he had brought to bed for the purpose, was taunting the ear in revenge for the insult with which his suit had once been rejected. 'What's the bedbug's excuse,' asked Beatrice 'for biting without bothering to sing first?' 'Her story is that man once tried to destroy her and her new-hatched brood by pouring a kettle of hot water on them. Her little ones were about to give up the struggle but she said to them: Don't give up, whatever is hot will become cold.' 'And so they survived to bite us tonight.' 'Exactly.' 'I wonder what she will tell them after a good spray of aerosol insecticide?' Which led her to ask Chris why he had not thought of buying himself a can of Flit since getting here. 'I thought of it actually the first night but then decided against it in the morning.' 'What?' 'You see, Emmanuel made the point that since aerosol was a remedy our host could not himself afford it was perhaps better not to insult him by introducing it into his household. I was stunned by that argument, and he handed back to me the money I had given him to buy a canister at the petrol station.' Beatrice was silent for a while. Then she said 'What a fellow, that Emmanuel of yours! Still I am glad I won't be spending five nights here.' Their low-toned conversation was abruptly interrupted by a major disturbance on the floor. One child, it appeared, had urinated on his brother. The remonstrance, sleepy at first, quickly sharpened into clear-eyed accusations and a general commotion in which someone soon began to cry, calling on his mother. Click! went the switch and the single naked bulb hanging down the centre of the ceiling flooded the room with light. Chris and Beatrice remained still and silent like a couple of mice interrupted far from their hole and sheltering behind utensils in a crowded room. 'Shush!' It must have been either the biggest of the three boys or the bigger of the two girls taking command. Nothing more was heard after that. They were probably speaking by signs and with their eyes, no doubt pointing to the bed and its distinguished occupants. The switch went click again and darkness returned, broken for a while by discreet whispers; and then silence. THE DECISION BY CHRIS and his two companions to travel to the North by bus instead of Braimoh's taxi was well taken because a bus was bound to attract less attention to itself than a taxi even when it was as old as Braimoh's. The bus they chose was one of a new generation of transports known, even to the illiterate, as _Luxurious__, so called because they were factory-built and fitted out with upholstered seats. Chris had never been inside a _Luxurious__ before. Indeed his last experience in Kangan buses was years and years ago before he had left to study in Britain. In those days buses were still the crude handiwork of bold and ingenious panelbeaters and welders who knocked any sheet-metal that came to hand into a container on wheels, and got a sign-writer to paint BUS in florid letters all over it. Before embarking on _Luxurious__, Chris walked round it sizing it up like a prospective buyer. He felt a curious pride in its transformation which had not entirely abandoned its origins. The florid lettering had remained virtually unchanged by prosperity. Perhaps the same sign-writers of his younger days were still working or, more likely, had influenced generations of apprentices in their peculiar calligraphy. And to think of it, that imaginative roadside welder who created the first crude buses might be the managing director of the transport company that now had a fleet of _Luxuriouses__! If there had been no progress in the nation's affairs at the top there had clearly been some near the bottom, albeit undirected and therefore only half-realized. The sign-writers had long expanded their assignment from merely copying down the short word BUS into more elaborate messages rather in the tradition of that unknown monk working away soberly by candle-light copying out the Lord's Prayer as he must have done scores of times before and then, seized by a sudden and unprecedented impulse of adoration, proceeded to end the prayer on a new fantastic flourish of his own: _For thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen__! The sign-writers of Kangan did not work in dark and holy seclusions of monasteries but in free-for-all market-places under the fiery eye of the sun. And yet in ways not unlike the monk's they sought in their work to capture the past as well as invent a future. _Luxurious__ had inscribed on its blue body in reds, yellows and whites three different legends--one at the back, another at the sides and the third, and perhaps most important, at the masthead, on top of the front windscreen. Chris, now fully reconciled to his new condition as a wide-eyed newcomer to the ways of Kangan made a mental note of these inscriptions. The one at the back of the bus, written in the indigenous language of Bassa, concise in the extreme and, for that reason, hard if not impossible to translate said simply: _Ife onye metalu__--What a man commits. At the sides the inscriptions switched to words of English: _All Saints Bus__; and in front, also in English, they announced finally (or perhaps initially!) _Angel of Mercy__. Chris took a window seat in the middle section of the bus; Braimoh had already secured a place for himself in front just behind the driver; while Emmanuel on an aisle seat at the rear was chatting up a most attractive girl whose striking features had earlier at the ticketing office made not a fleeting impression on Chris himself. Those three legends now began to tease and exercise his mind; perhaps they came handy as an antidote to anxiety. After the near disaster at the Three Cowrie Bridge he had become persuaded that in moments of stress his face was perhaps too candid a mirror to his mind, and he had set about cultivating what he hoped in future would pass for a relaxed countenance and serve him more prudently. But practising deep-breathing exercises and other forms of relaxation therapy in front of a mirror was one thing, and being able to actually look relaxed if a team of vicious security men should for example board the bus now, quite another. To paraphrase a recent wise admonition, how was he to give the impression to the world in such an emergency that this unaccustomed bus in which he now sat nervously was actually his father's property? Paradoxically Braimoh who owned nothing to speak of could pass, by the way he sat up there, as the true son of the proprietor of _Angel of Mercy__, alias _All Saints__, alias _Ife onye metalu__. Glancing back to the rear of the bus Chris saw Emmanuel who didn't own anything either, at least not for the moment, also pretty much at ease; not to the degree of Braimoh of course, but more so by far than Yours Sincerely who, don't forget, is one of the troika of proprietors who own Kangan itself! He smiled, bitterly. That Beatrice girl of yours must be closely watched! If he had a book he could perhaps bury his thoughts in it and escape the betrayal of a tell-tale face. But a man reading a book in a Kangan bus in order to evade notice would have to be out of his mind. So the only reading material he had in his bag were a few unsigned and innocuous poems he had salvaged from scattered papers in Ikem's house. So those body decorations and beauty marks on _Luxurious__ rose to occupy his mind. The christian and quasi-christian calligraphy posed no problem and held no terror. But not so that other one: _Ife onye metalu__, a statement unclear and menacing in its very inconclusiveness. What a man commits ... Follows him? Comes back to take its toll? Was that all? No, that was only part of it, thought Chris, the most innocuous part in fact. The real burden of that cryptic scripture seemed to turn the matter right around. Whatever we see following a man, whatever fate comes to take revenge on him, can only be what that man in some way or another, in a previous life if not in this, has committed. That was it! So those three words wrapped in an archaic tongue and tucked away at the tail of the bus turn out to be the opening segment of a full-blooded heathen antiphony offering a primitive and quite deadly exposition of suffering. The guilty suffers; the sufferer is guilty. As for the righteous, those whose arms are straight (including no doubt the owner of _Luxurious__ ), _they__ will always prosper! After a mental pause Chris began to smile again not at the outrageous theology he had unmasked but at the hardheaded prudence of the owner of _Luxurious__ who had the presence of mind to ring his valued property around with a protective insurance from every faith he knew so that if one should fail to ignite the next might be triggered off. He went one better than the pessimist holding up his trousers with a belt as well as a pair of braces; he added a girdle studded liberally with leather-covered little amulets! SEVENTEEN _The Great North Road__ The kind of people--local bourgeoisie and foreign diplomats--who sidle up to you at cocktail parties to inform you that Bassa was not Kangan are the very ones who go on behaving as though it was. Why? Because, like the rest of the best people, they have never travelled by bus out of Bassa on the Great North Road. If they had, even once, they would have believed and stopped prating! But they always proffer the excuse that it is too dangerous, too sweaty and, above all, too long a journey for busy people. Now, as the overwhelming force of this simple, always-taken-in-vain reality impinged on each of Chris's five, or was it six, senses even as hordes of flying insects after the first rain bombard street lamps, the ensuing knowledge seeped through every pore in his skin into the core of his being continuing the transformation, already in process, of the man he was. What would happen now, he wondered, if the wheels of fortune should turn again and return him to the very haunts of his previous life, to the same cocktail circuits, those hollow rituals which in fairness to him, he always loathed for their sheer vapidity and perhaps even more for the physical pain they caused him? For being somewhat weak of hearing he was forced by the cumulative drone of a hundred or more conversations into an aural blockade in which he could do no better than wander aimlessly from one set of moving lips to another, hearing absolutely nothing, smiling idiotically. What would he do if--but make God no 'gree--he should find himself again in that torture chamber? He would pray for courage to tell each pair of lips and set of teeth before moving on to the next: 'Yes, but do you know that although you say so, it is actually true?' And for his courage he may perhaps be rewarded with the rare pleasure of seeing, since he could not hear, one vacuous idiot after another shut his trap for a few peaceful seconds in total mystification, because his piston lips may only have asked: '_How the go de go?__' Beatrice was of course absolutely right about never going to cocktail parties, but then Beatrice never had the misfortune to be Commissioner for Information. No, Bassa was certainly not Kangan. From this authoritative windowseat in _Luxurious__ Chris could now vouch for that! The impenetrable rain forests of the South through which even a great highway snaked like a mere game track began to yield ground most grudgingly at first but in time a little more willingly to less prodigious growths; and a couple of hundred kilometres further north, unbelievably, to open parklands of grass and stunted trees. The traveller's spirits rose in step with this diminution of forests which gave the eye a heady facility to roam freely and take in wide panoramas of space stretching to a horizon where tiny trees on distant hills and against clear skies formed miniature Japanese gardens. Even the asphalt on which _Luxurious__ sped towards the North told its own story of two countries. Thickly-laid and cushiony at first it steadily deteriorated into thin black paint applied with niggardly strokes of a brush over the laterite beginning to break up and reveal, as the journey progressed, more and more of the brown underlay, forcing the elegant and beautiful _Luxurious__ to lurch from side to side in order to avoid the deepest ruts and pot-holes. But Chris welcomed this disappointment of comfort for the blessing it had in tow, for it curtailed the recklessness of _Luxurious__ which had been conducting herself like a termagant of the highway treating her passengers' safety cavalierly and bullying every smaller vehicle she encountered clean out of the way as though traffic rights were merely a matter of size. Broken roads and bumpy rides had their uses, thought Chris. The lifting of his spirits which had enabled him to indulge himself in every kind of visual and intellectual conceit was due to one great and happy fact. Once _Luxurious__ had left the metropolis of Bassa and headed into the forest tunnels that eventually led into the open country the security checks took a dramatic change for the better. For a while they continued to occur at about the same intervals of distance and were manned by about the same kind of strength. But their purpose had changed. They took hardly any notice of the passengers but concentrated on demanding and receiving gratification from the bus operators. Even when on one occasion a particularly fiercelooking policeman ordered all passengers to disembark it turned out to be no more than a clever ruse for extracting a bigger toll from the driver, and the few passengers including Braimoh who had actually disembarked were smilingly asked to resume their seats. So it was not only the magic of the countryside, though it did play its part, which enabled Chris's mind, so cramped lately, to float away over this wide expanse of grass-covered landscape with its plains and valleys and hills dotted around with small picture-book trees of every imaginable tree-shape and every shade of green. This flight from danger was taking on the colours and contours of a picnic! The towns and villages on the Great North Road responded in appropriate ways to the general scaling-down in the size of structures as one pushed out of the rain country slowly towards the land of droughts. The massive buildings of the new-rich down the coast gave way to less imposing but still iron-roofed and cement-walled houses, in much the same way as the giant forests of iroko and mahogany and other great hardwoods had given way to flowering trees like flames-of-the-forest. As the bus lurched from one side of the road to the other trying to avoid the sharp edges of washed-out bitumen Chris noticed that the same iron roofs were now borne more and more on the shoulders of mud walls plastered over with cement. But in due course this pretence was dropped and the walls owned up frankly to being of reddish earth. The march-past of dwellings in descending hierarchies continued until the modest militias of round thatched huts began to pass slowly across Chris's reviewing stand. Police and army checkpoints came and went fairly regularly and had dropped _their__ pretence of looking inside the bus from the forward door. Now they took their money openly from the operators with seeming good humour on both sides. But the driver and his mate never failed to grumble and curse the fellows soon afterwards. 'Make your mother hair catch fire,' prayed the driver on one occasion as soon as he had pulled away from a policeman with whom he seemed to have had a few initial problems. The bus had been travelling for a little over five hours when it pulled up in the famous dusty and bustling market-town of Agbata, rather large and active for that part of the country. It was the main watering-place of the Great North Road beloved of seasoned travellers on this route. The passengers were glad to escape from the stagnant, cooped-up heat inside the bus into the dry hot waves of the open air. As they disembarked they kicked the cramps out of their leg-joints and sought out what privacy they could find in that unsheltered, sandy terrain to ease themselves. Proprietors of eating-houses and other shacks had regular running battles with every batch of freshly disembarked passengers especially the women eyeing their backyards in spite of many bold scrawls: DON'T URINATE HERE. Most of the men emboldened by tradition and regular travel did not wander around to the same extent like a hen looking for a place to drop her egg but simply picked a big parked truck, moved up close enough and relieved themselves against one of the tyres. The next concern, food, was more readily available. Scores of little huts with grand names competed for the travellers' custom with colourful signboards backed up with verbal appeals: _Goat meat here! Egusi soup here! Bushmeat here! Come here for Rice! Fine Fine Pounded Yam!__ The word _decent__, variously spelt, occurred on most of the signboards. Chris and his companions settled for Very Desent Restorant for no better reason than its fairly clean, yellow door-blind. In the bus the three had prudently behaved like total strangers. But the last hundred and fifty or so kilometres had shown that they did not need that level of caution. And so now they sat boldly at one table and ordered their food; rice for Chris, fried yam and goatmeat stew for Emmanuel and _garri__ and bushmeat stew for Braimoh. They still did not talk much among themselves and could quite easily have passed for three travellers who perhaps knew each other slightly or even struck up acquaintance in the course of the journey. The waitress brought them a plastic bowl of water to wash their hands and a saucer with caked soap-powder. It was clear the water had not been changed for quite a while and a greasy line of palm-oil circled the bowl just above the murky water. Chris to whom the water was first offered looked instinctively first at his palm and then at the water and shook his head. Emmanuel also declined. Braimoh, boldest of the group, asked the young lady to change the water, which immediately brought in the smiling-eyed proprietress who had been presiding from a distance. 'Change the water?' she laughed. 'You people from the South! Do you know how much we pay for a tin now? One manilla fifty.' 'And the tankers have not come today,' chipped in the waitress still holding her bowl of dirty water. 'No,' said her mistress. 'The tankers have not come. Those people you see over there are selling yesterday's water at two manilla.' She pointed through the window to a man carrying across his shoulder like a see-saw a stout pole at each end of which was tied a four-gallon tin. There were two or three others like him manoeuvring their heavy and tricky burden expertly through the crowd. A FEW KILOMETRES north of Agbata there was a fairly long bridge over a completely dry river-bed and beyond it a huge signboard saying: WELCOME TO SOUTH ABAZON. It was amazing, thought Chris, how provincial boundaries drawn by all accounts quite arbitrarily by the British fifty years ago and more sometimes coincided so completely with reality. Beyond that dried up river there was hardly a yard of transition; you drove straight into scrubland which two years without rain had virtually turned to desert. The air current blowing into the bus seemed to be fanned from a furnace. The only green things around now were the formidably spiked cactus serving as shelter around desolate clusters of huts and, once in a while in the dusty fields, a fat-bottomed baobab tree so strange in appearance that one could easily believe the story that elephants looking for water when they still roamed these parts would pierce the crusty bark of the baobab with their tusk and suck the juices stored in the years of rain by the tree inside its monumental bole. At the provincial boundary Chris suffered a recurrence of sharp anxiety at the sudden sight of a vast deployment of police and troops larger than any they had encountered since leaving Bassa. But they took no interest whatsover in the passengers, neither did they delay the driver who went down and across the road to see one of them. As he returned to resume his driving-seat he waved to them in what seemed to Chris like a very friendly goodbye. But no sooner had he driven clear of their road bar than he broke into loud and unrestrained complaints about their greed and finally called down the curse of fire to scorch their mothers' bushes. Security forces! Who or what were they securing? Perhaps they were posted there to prevent the hungry desert from taking its begging bowl inside the secure borders of the South. As the bus plunged deeper into the burning desolation Chris reached into his bag and pulled out Ikem's unsigned 'Pillar of Fire: A hymn to the Sun,' and began to read it slowly with fresh eyes, lipping the words like an amazed learner in a literacy campaign class. Perhaps it was seeing the anthills in the scorched landscape that set him off revealing in details he had not before experienced how the searing accuracy of the poet's eye was primed not on fancy but fact. And to think that this was not the real Abazon yet; that the real heart of the disaster must be at least another day's journey ahead! The dust had turned ashen. A man on a donkey was overtaken by the bus, his face a perfect picture of a corpse that died in the harmattan. ... And now the times had come round again out of storyland. Perhaps not as bad as the first times, yet. But they could easily end worse. Why? Because today no one can rise and march south by starlight abandoning crippled kindred in the wild savannah and arrive stealthily at a tiny village and fall upon its inhabitants and slay them and take their land and say: I did it because death stared through my eye. So they send instead a deputation of elders to the government who hold the yam today and hold the knife, to seek help of them. After Agbata there were numerous empty seats in the bus. Braimoh moved down and sat directly in front of Chris who had been joined by Emmanuel since the girl had deserted him to sit with a fellow student-nurse. 'Young men are not what they used to be,' said Chris. 'You mean you let a girl like that slip through your fingers on a bus excursion?' 'I did my best but she wouldn't bite. And do you blame her seeing these rags I'm reduced to?' He made a mock gesture of contempt with his left hand taking in his entire person decked out in ill-fitting second-hand clothes. 'Such a tramp! And on top of it all you should have heard the kind of pidgin I had to speak.' 'Poor fellow,' said Chris with a gleam in his eyes. 'I am truly sorry for all this inconvenience.' 'I must confess I became so frustrated at one point I began asking her if she had ever heard of a certain President of the Students Union on the run.' 'You didn't!' 'No. But I nearly did. It is not easy to lose a girl like that.' 'And under false pretences!' 'Imagine!' 'Sorry-o.' 'Actually she is the shyest thing I have ever met in all my life. I don't think it was my clothes alone.' 'I shouldn't have thought so either. Your sterling quality would shine through any rags.' 'Thanks! The real trouble was getting her to open her mouth. She spoke at the rate of one word per hour. And it was either _yes__ or _no__.' 'How did you find out she was a student-nurse?' 'Na proper tug-of-war.' 'What's she called?' 'Adamma. Her father is a Customs Officer in the far north.' 'A lot of information to piece together from yes and no.' They laughed and fell into silence as if on some signal. They had each independently come to the same conclusion that though everything had gone reasonably well so far they must not push their luck by talking and laughing too much. It was in the ensuing reverie that Chris, gazing out into the empty landscape, had become aware of the anthills. When he had read the prose-poem through and read the last paragraph or two over again he said quietly to Emmanuel: 'You must read this,' and passed the paper to him. It was Braimoh who first drew their attention to a large crowd on the road half-akilometre or so ahead. Almost simultaneously everybody in the bus seemed to have become aware of the spectacle so unusual and so visible in that flat, treeless country. Many of the passengers had lifted themselves to half-standing positions at their seats the better to see this strange sight. What could it be? A check-point? The driver slowed down to a wary pace. As the scene came closer, a few uniforms began to emerge out of the dusty haze. There were a few cars and trucks parked this side of the crowd and a bus that was heading South and perhaps other vehicles as well slowly became visible beyond. The uniforms were greatly outnumbered by people in regular outfits, presumably passengers whose journey had been interrupted, and even by ragged peasants attracted from the arid lives of a few scattered hamlets of round huts dotting the landscape. The bus continued its progress to this mystery but at a mere cautious crawl. A road accident? No! There was something discernible in the prancing about which did not suggest sorrow or anger but a strange kind of merry-making. And now there was no longer any doubt. Beer bottles could be seen in nearly all hands and the dancing--for no other name seemed better for this activity--was constantly accompanied by the throwing of the head backwards and the emptying of bottles direct into gullets without touching the lips. The bus pulled up to the side. Some of the crowd were rushing towards it like a tipsy welcoming-party. But the pulling up of the bus and the sudden explosion inside it, like a hand-grenade thrown from the crowd, of the word COUP! came on top of each other. The bus was evacuated like a vessel on fire. The driver, unlike a good and honourable captain, shoved people aside to get to the ground first. Chris plunged into the crowd looking for someone who might have coherent information. Ultimately he sighted the police sergeant and pulled him aside rather brusquely in his breathless eagerness. The fellow was pleased to oblige, a bottle in his right and a Mark IV rifle in his left. 'Na radio there talk am,' was how he began. _There__ was an unsightly shack of cardboard and metal thrown together to provide occasional relief to the check-point crew from the sun's onslaught and perhaps also a little privacy for negotiating difficult bribes from motorists. A radio set in there had apparently given the news. 'So at the same time we hear the news this lorry wey dem load beer full up come de pass. So we say na God send am. The driver talk say the beer no be him own, na government get am. So we say: very good. As Government done fall now, na who go drink the beer? So we self we de stand for sun here, no water to drink; na him God send us small beer to make our own cocktail party.' His laughter was actually quite infectious and the little crowd that had quickly gathered around their story-teller nodding assent and swilling the beer at intervals, joined in the laughter. Even Chris had to laugh, but really as a bribe for getting more information, not from genuine amusement. 'Where is the radio?' he asked, thinking they must be putting out other announcements in the midst of martial music. 'They done thief-am. As we dey for road de drink a thief-man go inside carry the radio commot. This country na so so thief-man full am. But na me and them. They no know me? Before any vehicle can move out from here today I go search am well well and the stupid arm-robber wey hold my radio na him soul go rest in peace, with the President.' 'Did they say anything about the President?' The sergeant looked at him suspiciously. 'Why you de make all this crossexamination? Wetin concern poor man like you and President, eh? I say wetin concern vulture and barber?' He was clearly enjoying the attention. 'Anyways, the President done disappear. They no fit find am again. They say unknown persons enter Palace and kidnap am. So make everybody de watch proper for this check-point.' He burst out into another peal of laughter taking his willing hearers. 'This our country na waa! I never hear the likeness before. A whole President de miss; like old woman de waka for village talk say him goat de miss! This Africa na waa!' 'No be you tell whiteman make he commot?' asked somebody from the crowd. 'Ehe, white man done go now, and hand over to President. Now that one done loss for inside bush. Wetin we go do again?' 'We go make another President. That one no hard,' said a third person. 'He no hard, eh? Next tomorrow they go tell you say your new President climb palm-tree and no fit come down again,' said the second man to a tremendous outburst of laughter. He was obviously a wit to reckon with, and knew it. 'So wetin we go do now?' 'Make every man, woman and child and even those them never born, make everybody collect twenty manilla each and bring to me and I go take am go England and negotiate with IMF to bring white man back to Kangan.' Chris had detached himself from this bizarre group to look for Emmanuel. 'Can you make any sense of this?' he asked when he found him. 'Not yet, sir. Except it appears His Excellency was kidnapped last night and the Chief of Staff has sworn to find him but has meanwhile taken over the reins of government.' 'We must head back to Bassa. Right away. Where is Braimoh? Get our things out of the bus.' His obsessed seriousness was a rebuke to Emmanuel's faint-hearted sarcasm and he went away to his assignment somewhat chastened. Chris plunged into another section of the crowd which was fast degenerating into drunken mayhem. Bottles were smashed on the road after they were emptied and sometimes before, and more than a few unshod feet were already bleeding. Any promising informant he approached was too drunk and, what was more, critical of him for asking sober questions amounting almost to mental harassment of his victims. 'Go and have a drink,' one of them said to him, like a man who, before his present state, had been used to exercising authority. 'I have had a drink. Several drinks,' said Chris, sounding superior without perhaps intending to. 'If you have drunk ... As I have drunk ... why are you standing straight like that? Or is it my eyes.' The fellow's head was going from side to side like an albino, though he was shiny-black like ebony. 'I am not standing straight,' said Chris, unaccountably mesmerized by this highly articulate drunk. 'No, it is not my eyes ... You are not standing ... I mean to say, you _are__ standing as straight as a flag-pole. You get me? My difficulty then is: if as you say you drank as much beer as myself, why are you standing straight? Or put it another way. If two of us ate the same palm-oil chop, how come one of us, i.e. yourself, is passing black shit? That is what I want to know, mister. Two people ate palm-oil soup ...' 'OK, we will talk about that later.' 'Later? Why? Procrastination is a lazy man's apology.' Hiccup! 'As my headmaster used to say.' Hiccup! 'He loved big words; and something else he loved, I can tell you ... His cane ...' 'Thanks! See you,' said Chris wrenching himself away. The girl's desperate shriek rose high over the dense sprawling noises of the road party. The police sergeant was dragging her in the direction of a small cluster of round huts not far from the road and surrounded as was common in these parts by a fence of hideously-spiked cactus. He was pulling her by the wrists, his gun slung from the shoulder. A few of the passengers, mostly other women, were pleading and protesting timorously. But most of the men found it very funny indeed. She threw herself down on her buttocks in desperation. But the sergeant would not let up. He dragged her along on the seat of her once neat blue dress through clumps of scorched tares and dangers of broken glass. Chris bounded forward and held the man's hand and ordered him to release the girl at once. As if that was not enough he said, 'I will make a report about this to the Inspector-General of Police.' 'You go report me for where? You de craze! No be you de ask about President just now? If you no commot for my front now I go blow your head to Jericho, craze-man.' 'Na you de craze,' said Chris. 'A police officer stealing a lorry-load of beer and then abducting a school girl! You are a disgrace to the force.' The other said nothing more. He unslung his gun, cocked it, narrowed his eyes while confused voices went up all around some asking Chris to run, others the policeman to put the gun away. Chris stood his ground looking straight into the man's face, daring him to shoot. And he did, point-blank into the chest presented to him. 'My friend, do you realize you have just shot the Commissioner for Information?' asked a man unsteady on his feet and shaking his head from side to side like an albino in bright sunshine. Emmanuel and Braimoh, carrying the bags they had retrieved from the bus, arrived on the scene as Chris sank first to his knees in a grotesque supplicatory posture and then keeled over sideways before settling flat on his back. Emmanuel went down and knelt beside him and the girl knelt on the other side fumbling with the wounded man's shirt-front to stop a big hole through which blood escaped in copious spasms. 'Please, sir, don't go!' cried Emmanuel, tears pouring down his face. Chris shook his head and then seemed to gather all his strength to expel the agony on his twisted face and set a twilight smile on it. Through the smile he murmured words that sounded like _The Last Grin__... A violent cough throttled the rest. He shivered with his whole body and lay still. The sergeant had dropped his gun and fled into the wild scrubland. Braimoh had raced after him past the clusters of huts and, a hundred yards or so beyond, had wrestled him to the ground. They rolled over and over sending up whirls of dust. But Braimoh was no match for him in size, strength or desperation. The crowd on the road saw him get up again and continue his run, unattended this time, into a red sunset. EIGHTEEN BEATRICE HAD DECIDED on a sudden inspiration to hold a naming ceremony in her flat for Elewa's baby-girl. She did not intend a traditional ceremony. Indeed except in name only she did not intend ceremony of any kind. It seemed to her unlikely from the look of things that she could face anything remotely resembling a ceremony for a long, long time. But a baby had to have a name, and there seemed nothing particularly wrong in giving it one in the company of a few friends, or doing it on the seventh market as tradition prescribed. Every other detail, however, would fall into abeyance, for this was a baby born into deprivation--like most, of course; but unlike most it was not even blessed with an incurably optimistic sponsor ready to hold it up on its naming day and call it _The-one-who-walks-into-abundance__ or _The-one-who-comes-to-eat__ or suchlike and then blithely hand it back to its mother to begin a wretched trudge through life, a parody of its own name. No, this baby would not lie in cushioned safety from the daily stings of the little ants of the earth floor. Indeed it was already having to manage without one necessity even the poorest may take for granted--a father (even a scarecrow father would have sufficed) to hold it in his hands and pronounce its name on this twenty-eighth day of its life. Beatrice had asked the same handful of friends who had kept together around her like stragglers from a massacred army. That she even managed this residual relationship was a measure of the change she had begun to undergo even before the violent events of the recent past; that she did it in virtual silence an eloquent tribute to the potency of lost causes. In earlier times she would have responded to Chris's death by retreating completely into herself, selecting as wild beasts often do before they die a dark, lonely corner of the forest, distrustful of the solace of their fellows. But the weeks of ill omen presaging the bloody events of November had already thrown her into a defensive pact with a small band of near-strangers that was to prove stronger than kindred or mere friendship. Like old kinships this one was pledged also on blood. It was not, however, blood flowing safe and inviolate in its veins but blood casually spilt and profaned. In spite of her toughness Beatrice actually fared worse than Elewa in the first shock of bereavement. For weeks she sprawled in total devastation. Then one morning she rose up, as it were, and distanced herself from her thoughts. It was the morning of Elewa's threatened miscarriage. From that day she had addressed herself to the well-being of the young woman through the remaining weeks to her confinement. When she first attempted during those weeks to resume contact with the desolation inside her heart she was surprised to find that she already felt stronger on her feet and clearer in the head. She could now return less and less timidly to relive aspects of the nightmare and even begin to reassess her reflexes, feelings and thoughts. Was she right, for instance, to turn down the new Head of State's special invitation to the state funeral he ordered for Chris? Did she hurt her duty to his memory more by keeping away than she honoured it by showing her mistrust of his enemies? Twenty-four hours after the _coup d'tat__, before the news of Chris got to her, she had watched with utter revulsion a lachrymose Major-General Ahmed Lango suddenly surface and make his 'pledge to the nation to bring the perpetrators of this heinous crime quickly to book.' Even the gullible people of Kangan, famous for dancing in the streets at every change of government, were asking where this loyal officer was hiding in the first twenty-four hours after his Commander was kidnapped from the Palace by 'unknown persons', tortured, shot in the head and buried under one foot of soil in the bush. But by the time Kangan was asking these questions Beatrice had heard the news of Chris's murder and lost contact with everything else. The news was brought to her by Captain Abdul Medani. He was in mufti and came in a taxi. But his face had become so deeply etched in Beatrice's mind during the weeks he played the mystery voice that in spite of his dress and the dark glasses she had immediately recognized the offficer who had led the search of her flat. And she had read his countenance and deciphered the disaster before he opened his mouth. He said he just wanted to be sure she did not hear it on the air, and left immediately. An hour later it was broadcast on the national radio. Later that evening Emmanuel and Braimoh arrived back. In the weeks and months that followed, her flat became vitually the home of Emmanuel and Braimoh and the girl Adamma. The Captain also came quite frequently. Sometimes, especially at weekends, they would all be there together and discuss the deepening crisis in the country. At first Beatrice heard the voices and the arguments around her as though they came from an adjoining room behind a closed door. But slowly she began to pick out the words out of the muffled sounds, then snatches of sentences and finally even the occasional joke forcing a faint smile like a twitch on her slow-thawing face. The door had slowly opened and the words and snatches of sentences coalesced into spirited conversations and even debates mostly between Emmanuel and Abdul. But although Beatrice did seem to hear what was said she still did not take part in the exchanges. She still steered her own thoughts as carefully as she could around them. But there were collisions nonetheless which could not but alter now and again, however slightly, the speed and drift of her own silent activity. '... And what I want to know from you is how this latest blood-letting has helped Kangan in its historical march as you call it. The blood of His Former Excellency and the blood of his victims--if indeed they were his victims ...' If indeed they were _his__ victims, repeated Beatrice in her mind. The very thought that had already visited her dressed, albeit, differently! The explanation of the tragedy of Chris and Ikem in terms of petty human calculation or personal accident had begun to give way in her throbbing mind to an altogether more terrifying but more plausible theory of premeditation. The image of Chris as just another stranger who chanced upon death on the Great North Road or Ikem as an early victim of a waxing police state was no longer satisfactory. Were they not in fact trailed travellers whose journeys from start to finish had been carefully programmed in advance by an alienated history? If so, how many more doomed voyagers were already in transit or just setting out, faces fresh with illusions of duty-free travel and happy landings ahead of them? That was the day she broke her long silence and asked the two young men: 'What must a people do to appease an embittered history?' The smiles that lit up the faces in the room, especially of the two indefatigable debaters stopped in their tracks, were not addressed to that grave question and its train of echoes from a bottomless pit of sadness. It was rather the ending of an exile that the faces acknowledged, the return of utterance to the sceptical priest struck dumb for a season by the Almighty for presuming to set limits to his omnipotence. It was not that Beatrice had spoken no words at all before that day. She said hello and even, on occasion, offered hospitality. Certainly she had resumed work in her office one week after Chris's burial; and at home she conducted her domestic life in the company of Elewa and Agatha. But in all this she had only used words that did not threaten to invade her thoughts and drag them into the profanity of the open air. She became more accessible only in slow stages, egged on usually by one little crisis or another in her small community. Abdul had confided to her that he had been assigned (or had assigned himself--it wasn't too clear which) to watch her and her friends. She had smiled and said, 'Good luck!' Weeks later she had decided in fairness to inform Emmanuel. He was outraged. 'The fellow is an _agent provocateur__. How can we be so naive?' 'We? You are such a gentleman, Emmanuel. The weeks with Chris, cooped up together and conspiring, I see, have left their mark. But, no; I'm not naive. The fellow is quite genuine.' 'How?' 'Woman's intuition, if you like.' 'Since when?' 'What do you mean since when? Are you asking me since when have I become a woman? ... And I have just called you a gentleman.' For a while after that Emmanuel had shown his resentment by ostentatiously keeping sealed lips whenever Abdul was around. Beatrice watched the two without further intervention. In the end it was curiosity which killed the cat of Emmanuel's silence. It all happened over the rumour about Colonel Johnson Ossai. 'Is it really true that he is missing?' Emmanuel had asked in spite of himself. Abdul had simply nodded without deigning to open _his__ mouth. He had become aware of Emmanuel's suspicion and had adopted what Beatrice considered a most sophisticated response--simply ignored it and him. 'But how can a whole boss of State Security just disappear? Like that!' 'I believe you had already left Bassa when the boss of the State itself went missing.' Then he positioned himself as if he was talking to Beatrice and the others. 'I can give a few facts that have emerged so far. Colonel Ossai was last seen going in to see the Head of State and has not been sighted ever since. You remember Idi Amin? Well, according to unconfirmed reports he used to strangle and behead his rivals for women and put their head in the fridge as a kind of trophy. So perhaps Colonel Ossai is in the cooler, somewhere.' 'You don't sound too concerned about your boss,' said Beatrice. 'That's awful, you know.' 'If I told you half of what I know about Ossai you wouldn't be too concerned either.' 'What a life!' said Emmanuel. 'Anyway, soldiering is not a sentimental profession. The first thing we learn is: Soja come, soja gwo.' But all that was weeks and months behind them--weeks and months of slow preparation for today's ritual outing. When Elewa moved up to Beatrice and whispered into her ear what she had just come to suspect as the probable reason for her mother not being there yet Beatrice decided to perform the naming herself and to do it right away. She called the little assembly to order and proceeded to improvise a ritual. She picked up the tiny bundle from its cot and, turning to Elewa, said: 'Name this child.' 'Na you go name am.' 'OK. You just saved a false step, anyway. Thanks. I will start afresh ... There was an Old Testament prophet who named his son _The-remnant-shall-return.__ They must have lived in times like this. We have a different metaphor, though; we have our own version of hope that springs eternal. We shall call this child AMAECHINA: _May-thepath-never-close.__ Ama for short.' 'But that's a boy's name.' 'No matter.' 'Girl fit answer am also.' 'It's a beautiful name. The Path of Ikem.' 'That's right. May it never close, never overgrow.' 'Das right!' 'May it always shine! The Shining Path of Ikem.' 'Dat na wonderful name.' 'Na fine name so.' 'In our traditional society,' resumed Beatrice, 'the father named the child. But the man who should have done it today is absent ... Stop that sniffling, Elewa! The man is not here although I know he is floating around us now, watching with that small-boy smile of his. I am used to teasing him and I will tease him now. What does a man know about a child anyway that he should presume to give it a name ...' 'Nothing except that his wife told him he is the father,' said Abdul, causing much laughter. 'Na true my brother,' said Braimoh. 'Na woman de come tell man say na him born the child. Then the man begin make _inyanga__ and begin answer father. Na _yy__ father we be.' 'Exactly. So I think our tradition is faulty there. It is really safest to ask the mother what her child is or means or should be called. So Elewa should really be holding Ama and telling us what she is. What it was like to be loved by that beautiful man Ikem. But Elewa is too shy. Look at her!' 'I no shy at all,' she replied, her eyes smiling and holding back tears at the same time like bright sunshine through a thin drizzle. 'I no shy but I no sabi book.' 'Dis no be book matter, my sister.' 'You no sabi book but you sabi plenty thing wey pass book, my dear girl.' 'Say that again,' said Emmanuel. 'I concur,' said Captain Medani. 'Dat na true word,' said Braimoh. 'I tell you!' said Aina. 'All of we,' continued Beatrice, 'done see _baad__ time; but na you one, Elewa, come produce something wonderful like this to show your sufferhead. Something alive and kicking.' 'That's true. Very true,' said the Captain. 'But living ideas ...' Emmanuel began haltingly. 'Ideas cannot live outside people,' said Beatrice rather peremptorily stopping him in mid-stride. He obeyed for a second, scratched his head and came right back blurting defiantly: 'I don't accept that. The ideas in one lecture by Ikem changed my entire life from a parrot to a man.' 'Really?' 'Yes, really. And the lives of some of my friends. It wasn't Ikem the man who changed me. I hardly knew him. It was his ideas set down on paper. One idea in particular: that we may accept a limitation on our actions but never, under no circumstances, must we accept restriction on our thinking.' 'OK,' said Beatrice bowing to this superior, unstoppable passion. 'I have also felt what you are saying, though I knew him too as a man. You win! People and Ideas, then. We shall drink to both of them.' As Agatha brought in a tray of drinks and burst into one of the songs of her sect-something with which she had never before graced this house--Emmanuel took the tray from her and placed it on the centre table. Adamma fetched the glasses and they began to serve. Agatha's hands freed meanwhile found more fitting occupation clapping her own accompaniment, and her waist swayed in slow dance. Jehova is not a person anyone can deceive Jehova is so great who is it can confuse him? If Jehova wants to bless who will dare to raise a curse? Jehova-jireh let us raise his name! Aina raised herself from her seat, untied and re-tied her outer _lappa__ and joined Agatha in her holy seductive dance. 'Abi Aina no be Moslem?' Beatrice asked Elewa in a whisper. 'Na proper grade one Moslem,' she replied wondering by way of a puzzled look what the point of the question was. Then she seemed all of a sudden to discern the questioner's difficulty. 'Dem talk say make Moslem no dance when Christian de sing?' she asked in return. 'No I didn't mean _that__,' replied Beatrice rather emphatically. But to herself she said, 'Well, if a daughter of Allah could join his rival's daughter in a holy dance, what is to stop the priestess of the unknown god from shaking a leg?' She smiled to herself. She was already swaying her head from side to side in lieu of hands which were still attempting to rock Ama to sleep. After five or six repeats of the same words of the catchy little song Braimoh shouted: 'Heep! Heep! Heep!' and the ecumenical fraternization was neatly terminated with a lusty 'Hooray!' and laughter. It was at this point that a taxi pulled up outside and discharged Elewa's mother and uncle. Beatrice and Elewa turned spontaneously to each other, one saying, 'You were right,' and the other, 'I no tell you!', at the same time. Beatrice knew Elewa's uncle by an unsavoury reputation which he now seemed quite determined to live up to. Before he fairly sat down his eyes had become glued to the tray of drinks and his Adam's apple danced restlessly like the trapped bubble in a bricklayer's spirit-level. 'Elewa, won't you offer a drink to Mama and your uncle?' Mama accepted a bottle of mineral water but the uncle declined the beer which was offered him demanding 'Snaps' instead. When he was told there was no schnapps in the house he merely said, 'Ah?'--a compressed but eloquent way of saying: A naming ceremony indeed, without schnapps. Beatrice got up, put the baby down in her cot, went to the sideboard and soon returned with a bottle of White Horse whisky. Elewa's uncle accepted the substitute quite readily and proceeded to swill two thimblefuls in quick succession throwing his head slightly back for the operation and working his cheeks like a pair of little bellows before swallowing. He put the little glass down and then asked for a bottle of beer. Looking sideways at her late husband's half-brother Elewa's mother said: 'It is better that we begin the work we came to do. I don't want anyone dropping my grandchild.' 'Nobody is going to drop anybody,' replied the uncle lifting his glass of beer to his lips with a lightly quivering hand ... 'Drink does not loosen a man's grip. It makes it stronger,' he added after gulping down half of the glass ... 'But since my wife here is troubled, let us agree with her and do as she says. A wise man agrees with his wife and eats lumps of smoked fish in his soup. A fool contradicts his wife and eats lumps of cocoyam.' Abdul's head was tilted towards Emmanuel who was translating the old people for him. Now all eyes turned to Beatrice. She had picked up the baby again, but instead of handing her to the old man who had set down his glass once more to receive it she said: 'This baby has already received its name. She is called Amaechina.' The old people were visibly stunned. The man recovered first and asked: 'Who gave her the name?' 'All of us here,' said Beatrice. 'All of you here,' repeated the old man. 'All of you are her father?' 'Yes, and mother.' His explosion into laughter took everybody by surprise and then dragged them all into his bombshell of gaiety. Except Elewa's mother. 'You young people,' said the old man. 'What you will bring this world to is pregnant and nursing a baby at the same time ... Give me a little more of that hot drink.' Elewa rushed the whisky bottle and the little glass back to him. 'A jolly old fellow,' said Abdul. 'You no know am. So make you wait small.' Elewa's poor mother was left high and dry carrying the anger of outraged custom and usage made none the lighter for having no one to focus it on. In the end she turned and heaped it on the opportunistic old man, a medicine-man hired to chase evil spirits whom evil spirits were now chasing. 'You will return my bottle of Snaps and the fowl,' she said to him, to everyone's surprise. His face clouded over for a very brief instant and quickly cleared up again. 'As to that,' he said, 'what is brought out before a masquerade cannot be taken indoors again. Food goes one way--downwards. If you see it going up you know the man is in trouble.' 'You will return my Snaps and the fowl,' she repeated obstinately. 'Listen to me my wife and let me give you advice. You are annoyed and I cannot say that I blame you. But what is the use of bending your neck at me like the chicken to the pot when its real enemy is not the pot in which it cooks nor even the fire which cooks it but the knife. Your quarrel is with these young people. Hold your daughter and her friends to refund to you your bottle of Snaps and your fowl. But as for the tribute placed in front of a masquerade, that one is gone with the masquerade into its ant-hole.' He went into another paroxysm of laughter scraping his sides which he now held like a loosening bundle between his palms. Everybody joined him once more, except Elewa's mother. He stopped abruptly and turned to the rest: 'Let me tell you people something. When my wife here came to me and said: Our daughter has a child and I want you to come and give her a name, I said to myself: Something is amiss. We did not hear _kpom__ to tell us that the palm branch has been cut before we heard _waa__ when it crashed through the bush. I did not hear of brideprice and you are telling me about naming a child. But I did not contradict my wife because I want fish in my soup ... Do you know why I am laughing like this? I am laughing because in you young people our world has met its match. Yes! You have put the world where it should sit ... My wife here was breaking her head looking for kolanuts, for alligator pepper, for honey and for bitter-leaf ...' 'And Snaps and agriculture chicken.' 'True. Those as well. And while she is cracking her head you people gather in this whiteman house and give the girl a boy's name ... That is how to handle this world ... If anybody thinks that I will start a fight because somebody has done the work I should do that person does not know me. I only fight when somebody else eats what I should eat. So I will not fight. Rather I will say thank you. I will say whoever ate the foofoo let him mop up the soup as well. A child has been named. What else is one looking for at the bottom of the soup-bowl if not fish? Wherever the child sleeps let it wake up in the morning, is my prayer ... My wife, where is that kolanut? I shall break it after all.' Everybody applauded this strange man's sudden decision, sparked off perhaps by the utterance of the word prayer. Elewa's mother could not keep up against the powerful current in favour of the old man. She opened her bag and handed a kolanut to him. 'Elewa, go and wash this and put it into a plate and bring me water to wash my hands.' Elewa and Agatha went into the kitchen to do as the old man had commanded. After he had washed his hands and wiped them importantly with a sparkling napkin that contrasted so harshly with his own dirt-and-sweat-tarnished jumper that used to be of white lace he assumed a sacramental posture, picked up the kolanut in his right hand and held it between four fingers and thumb, palm up, to the Almighty. 'Owner of the world! Man of countless names! The church people call you threein-one. It is a good name. But it carries miserly and insufficient praise. Four-hundred-inone would seem more fitting in our eyes. But we have no quarrel with church people; we have no quarrel with mosque people. Their intentions are good, their mind on the right road. Only the hand fails to throw as straight as the eye sees. We praise a man when he slaughters a fowl so that if his hand becomes stronger tomorrow he will slaughter a goat ... 'What brings us here is the child you sent us. May her path be straight ...' _'Is!'__ replied all the company. 'May she have life and may her mother have life.' _'Is!'__ 'What happened to her father, may it not happen again.' _'Is!'__ 'When I asked who named her they told me All of Us. May this child be the daughter of all of us.' _'Is!'__ 'May all of us have life!' _'Is!'__ 'May these young people here when they make the plans for their world not forget her. And all other children.' _'Is!'__ 'May they also remember useless old people like myself and Elewa's mother when they are making their plans.' _'Is!'__ 'We have seen too much trouble in Kangan since the white man left because those who make plans make plans for themselves only and their families.' Abdul was nodding energetically, his head bent gently towards his simultaneous translator, Emmanuel. 'I say, there is too much fighting in Kangan, too much killing. But fighting will not begin unless there is first a thrusting of fingers into eyes. Anybody who wants to outlaw fights must first outlaw the provocation of fingers thrust into eyes.' _'Is! Is!!'__ Abdul, a relative stranger to the kolanut ritual, was carried away beyond the accustomed limits of choral support right into exuberant hand-clapping. 'I have never entered a house like this before. May this not be my last time.' _'Is!'__ 'You are welcome any time,' added Beatrice following Abdul's breaking of ritual bounds. 'If something pursues us we shall escape but if we pursue something we shall catch it.' _'Is!'__ 'As long as what we pursue does not belong to somebody else.' _'Is!'__ 'Everybody's life!' _'Is!'__ 'The life of Bassa!' _'Is!'__ 'The life of Kangan.' _'Is!'__ AFTER ELEWA'S MOTHER AND UNCLE had left with Aina and Braimoh in the old taxi, the party continued in the quiet and relaxed afterglow of the day's ritual intensity. But it proved a day extraordinary in stamina and before long a new surge of passion was building up secretly below its placid expansiveness. It began in ripples of simple reminiscence. Emanuel, it was plain to see, was rather pleased with himself and so chose to congratulate someone else, Beatrice, on the evolution, as he called it, of the two-headed toast to people and ideas. She, on her part, was a captain whose leadership was sharpened more and more by sensitivity to the peculiar needs of her company. 'I must say I liked your spirited stand for ideas.' 'Mutual Admiration Club forming up again,' sang Abdul. 'And jealousy will get us nowhere,' sang Beatrice. 'But looking back on it,' continued Emmanuel passing up the bait of banter, 'I think you taught me something very important by holding out for people. Do you remember the day you told me that Chris had taught me to be a gentleman?' 'It was only a joke.' 'Jokes are serious,' said Abdul impishly. 'Yes they are ... That day and again today you were making me aware of my debt to Chris. I don't know why I never thought of it before but the greatest thing he taught me was seeing the way he died.' The jesting mood died instantly in the air, folded its wings and fell like a stone; the tributary conversations dried up. 'I was kneeling on the road at his side weeping uselessly. She,' he nodded his head in Adamma's direction, 'was trying to do something. Then I said something idiotic like _Don't go, don't leave us please.__ And, I can't describe it, that effort--you could touch it almost--to dismiss pain from his face and summon a smile and then crack a joke. He called it The Last Grin.' Beatrice started in her seat. 'Yes I remember,' said silent Adamma. 'The last green. But he did not finish it.' Beatrice rushed away into her bedroom. Elewa followed after her. While they were away nothing more was said. After a few minutes Elewa came back. 'Is she all right?' asked Abdul a little ahead of other inquirers. 'No trouble. To cry small no be bad thing. BB no be like me wey de cry every day like baby wey him mother die.' 'Madam too strong,' said Agatha. 'To strong too much no de good for woman.' 'E no good for anybody whether na man-o or na woman-o, na the same thing,' said Elewa. 'E good make person cry small ... I been try to stop am, I try sotay then I come say no, make you lef am.' 'WHY ARE YOU all sitting in darkness?' she said turning the lights on as she walked back into the room almost half an hour after she had left it. She spoke with great calmness in her voice. She had made up her face, and even tried on a smile as she resumed her seat. Then she said: 'I am very sorry.' 'Well, I am sorry to have raised that matter today. I didn't ...' 'No no no, Emmanuel. I am happy you raised it. In fact you can't know how grateful I feel. I can tell you I am happier now, much happier than I have been since that day.' She said no more. Perhaps in spite of this composure she could not continue. To fill the aching void, or perhaps he was already powerless in the grip of a gathering underflow, Emmanuel began again: 'You see I have been present only at two deaths ...' 'Make you put that your useless story for inside your pocket,' ordered Elewa. 'Why you de look for trouble so? Abi the one you done cause no belleful you?' 'Leave the young man alone. Emmanuel, please continue.' 'The first death I witnessed was my father and then Chris. Without Chris I could not have known that it was possible to die with dignity.' 'Your father didn't die with dignity?' asked Abdul quizzically. 'No, he didn't. Though he was an old man compared to Chris, he had not learnt how to die. He snapped at people; he even cried. He was frightened, scared to death. He ran from one doctor to another and when he had run through them all he took up prayerhouses. He had cancer of the prostate. Every day some vulture would descend on us from nowhere with the story of a prophet or prophetess in some outlandish village and my father would drag my poor mother there the next morning. It was a terrible relief when he died, I am ashamed to admit ... But look at Chris, a young man with all his life still in front of him and yet he was able to look death in the eyes and smile and make a joke. It was too wonderful ...' 'You don't know why I went in to cry ... That joke was a coded message to me, to us,' said Beatrice, to everyone's surprise. 'By the way, Adamma heard it better. What he was trying to say was _The last green__. It was a private joke of ours. The last green bottle. It was a terrible, bitter joke. He was laughing at himself. That was the great thing, by the way, about those two, Chris and Ikem. They could laugh at themselves and often did. Not so the pompous asses that have taken over.' 'Say that again!' said Emmanuel. 'You know why I cried? Chris was only just beginning to understand the lesson of that bitter joke. The bottles are up there on the wall hanging by a hair's breadth, yet looking down pompously on the world. Chris was sending us a message to beware. This world belongs to the people of the world not to any little caucus, no matter how talented ...' 'And particularly absurd when it is not even talented,' said Abdul. 'It was the same message Elewa's uncle was drumming out this afternoon, wasn't it? On his own crazy drum of course. Chris, in spite of his brilliance, was just beginning to be vaguely aware of people like that old man. Remember his prayer? He had never been inside a whiteman house like this before, may it not be his last.' 'And we said _Is!__' said Abdul. 'We did. It was a pledge. It had better be better than some pledges we have heard lately.' _'Ise!!'__ At last the prodigious passions of that extraordinary day seemed at an end. Silence descended as completely on the party indoors as had darkness outside. Ama whom Beatrice nicknamed Greedymouth having drunk both from the bottle and from Elewa's breast, pendant like a gorgeous ripe papaya on the tree, was sleeping quietly in her cot. No one spoke or stirred. No one sought another's eyes. Beatrice sat erect, her arms folded across her chest ... Then at last, like one just returned from a distant journey of the mind bearing a treasure in her eyes she murmured, to a welcoming party? merely to herself? _Beautiful!__ And she said it a second time even more softly: _Beautiful!__ The rest had now turned their faces on her. She alone gazed still at something remote--a third party invisible to the rest, a presence to whom she had spoken her quiet apostrophe? The change in her when it came was sudden. A deep breath audible through the room and a melting down of the statuesque told of her return ... 'I can't thank you enough, Emmanuel, for being there and bringing back the message. And you too, of course, Adamma.' She looked at each in turn with a strained smile on her countenance. 'Truth is beauty, isn't it? It must be you know to make someone dying in that pain, to make him ... smile. He sees it and it is ... How can I say it? ... it is unbearably, yes _unbearably__ beautiful. That's it! Like Kunene's Emperor Shaka, the spears of his assailants raining down on him. But he realized the truth at that moment, we're told, and died smiling ... Oh my Chris!' Two lines of tears coursed down under her eyes but she did not bother to wipe them ... 'BB, weting be dis now?' Elewa remonstrated, showing her two palms of innocence to the powers above. 'Even _my__ self I no de cry like dat! What kind trouble you wan begin cause now? I beg-o. Hmm!' The End
<|book_end|>

<|book_start|>
CHAPTER ONE Obi Leaves Umuofia At the age of twelve, Obi Okonkwo passed his Standard Six examinations with distinction in every subject. He won a scholarship to one of the best secondary schools in Eastern Nigeria. After five years, he passed the Cambridge School Certificate, again with distinction in every subject. Obi Okonkwo was the first student the UPU sent to England. The UPU gave Obi eight hundred pounds so that he could go to study in England. The eight hundred pounds was a loan, which Obi promised to pay back later. He would have to repay it when he had finished his studies in England and had a good job back in Nigeria. When Obi was getting ready to leave for England, there was great excitement in Umuofia. A few days before he left, his parents invited everyone to their house. Huge pots of rice and stew were placed on a large table in front of the guests. Jugs of palm wine were placed beside the pots of rice and stew. It was a great feast. It was the best feast that the Umuofians had seen in many, many years. After the guests had finished eating, the minister, Mr Ikedi, gave a long speech. As Mr Ikedi finished speaking, he turned to Obi. 'You are leaving us,' said Mr Ikedi. 'You are going to England to study and to find knowledge. But remember that you will meet many temptations in the white man's country.' 'I have heard sad stories about some young men from our country, who went to England to study,' Mr Ikedi went on. 'These young men did not work hard at their studies. They went dancing with women who were not suitable. Some of them married white women.' Everyone shook their heads. That was a terrible thing to do. 'So Obi,' said Mr Ikedi, 'you must not go dancing with women who are not suitable. We are sending you to England to study. You can enjoy life later, when you have completed your studies.' The meeting ended with a hymn and a prayer. As they were leaving, the guests said goodbye to Obi. They all shook hands with him. As they shook hands, they each gave Obi a small present. A shilling to buy notebooks. A penny to buy a pencil. They were all very small presents. But they were very large presents for poor people who worked hard on their small farms, day after day, year after year. CHAPTER TWO Obi's First Visit to Lagos Obi stayed in Lagos for a few days before getting on the plane that took him to England. When he was a small boy in Umuofia, Obi had heard stories about Lagos. 'There is no night in Lagos,' a visitor from the big city told the villagers. 'At night, the electric light shines like the sun.' Obi never forgot these stories about the bright lights of Lagos. When he arrived in Lagos, these were the first things he saw. Obi was met at the bus station by Joseph Okeke, a friend from Umuofia. Joseph was a clerk in the Nigerian Civil Service. He was much older than Obi, but they had been at junior school together. That first night, Joseph and Obi sat talking until three o'clock in the morning. Joseph told Obi about the cinema and the dance halls and about political meetings. 'You must learn to dance,' Joseph told Obi. 'You won't get a girlfriend if you can't dance.' Joseph's talk about girlfriends excited Obi. He wanted to know more about this strange and sinful new world. Joseph talked and talked. But finally, they both fell asleep. The next day, Joseph had a visitor - a young woman. The young woman was wearing a red and yellow dress, which fitted close, over her body. Her lips and her long fingernails were painted bright red. The woman did not look real. She looked like a painted doll. Obi remembered Mr Ikedi's words. Obi saw that Joseph wanted to be alone with his girlfriend. So Obi went out for a walk alone. CHAPTER THREE Clara Okeke Obi was away in England for almost four years. To Obi, the time seemed much longer. The long English winters made him feel cold and miserable. He often thought of his home country - Nigeria. His stay in England made him feel proud to be a Nigerian. Now it was time for Obi to return home. He was not going back by plane. He was going back on a small boat, which carried only twelve passengers. Obi put his case in his cabin and went to join the other passengers in the lounge. There was Clara Okeke! She was sitting in the lounge talking to a young Englishman. Obi had met Clara once before. He had met her at a dance for Nigerian students in London. Clara Okeke had come with a Nigerian student who knew Obi. Obi had thought Clara looked very beautiful. He had watched her dancing with other men. Finally, he was able to dance with her. But Obi was not a good dancer. After the dance ended, Clara had gone off to join her friends. Now Obi and Clara were going back to Nigeria on the same boat. Once again, Obi saw how beautiful she was. Obi sat down beside Clara and the Englishman. 'I think we have met before,' Obi said to Clara. Clara looked surprised and a little angry. 'At a dance for Nigerian students in London,' Obi went on. Clara was not interested. She turned away from Obi and went on talking to the young Englishman. Obi went back to his cabin and read a book. Sometimes he went on deck to look at the sea. This was the first time he had travelled by sea. He had heard other Nigerians talk about seasickness. But so far, the sea was calm and he was enjoying the journey. At breakfast, Obi sat down at a large table with ten other passengers. Clara was sitting at the same table, but Obi did not look at her or try to speak to her. Obi thought she was being cold and unfriendly to him. So he decided to be cold and unfriendly to her. On that first morning, all the passengers were hungry and ate a large breakfast. But during the day, the weather changed. The boat began to roll about on the rough sea. Obi went to the dining room for supper, but he could not eat anything. He went back to his cabin and lay down on the bed. Suddenly there was a knock on the door of his cabin. He opened the door and it was Clara. 'I saw that you did not look very well at supper,' she said, speaking in Ibo. 'So I've brought you some tablets. Take two before you go to bed. They will help you to get to sleep.' Obi began to thank her, but she said in English, 'I'm a nurse. I've brought enough tablets for all the passengers. Goodnight. You'll feel better in the morning.' Obi did not sleep that night. He thought all the time about Clara. She had been friendly at first. She had spoken to him in Ibo - their own language. But then she had spoken in English. When she spoke in English, she was not friendly. Did she want to be friends with him or not? Obi could not make up his mind. Obi got up early the next morning. He felt better. The deck had been washed and it was wet. He had to walk carefully. He stood at the side of the boat and looked out over the sea. Then he heard footsteps. He looked round. It was Clara. 'Good morning,' he said, with a friendly smile on his face. 'Good morning,' she replied and started to walk away. 'Thank you for the tablets,' he said in Ibo. 'Did they make you feel better?' she asked in English. 'Yes, very much.' 'I'm glad,' she said and walked on. Obi turned again to look out over the sea. Then he heard someone falling on the deck. It was a young Englishman. It was the Englishman Clara had been talking to in the lounge. Obi helped the Englishman to stand up. And from that moment, they became friends. The Englishman's name was John Macmillan. They played table tennis together and they drank together in the bar. They called each other John and Obi. 'How old are you, Obi?' John asked one evening, as they were sitting in the bar. 'Twenty-five,' replied Obi. 'And you?' 'The same as you,' said John 'I'm twenty-five too. How old do you think Miss Okeke is?' 'I think she's about twenty-three,' replied Obi. 'She's very beautiful,' said John. 'Don't you agree?' 'Yes,' replied Obi. 'Very beautiful.' One evening, the boat stopped at Funchal - a port on the islands of the Madeiras. After supper, Obi and John decided to go for a walk through the small town. John invited Clara to go with them. 'It's very pretty,' said Clara, as they walked through the narrow streets and the little gardens and the green parks. They arrived back at the boat a few hours later. The other passengers had not come back. There was no one on the deck of the boat. 'I'm going to my cabin,' Macmillan told them. 'I've got an important letter to write. See you in the morning.' He went to his cabin. Obi and Clara were left alone. Obi and Clara looked at each other for a moment. Suddenly, without a word, Obi took her in his arms. He kissed her again and again. 'Leave me,' she whispered. 'I love you,' Obi whispered to her. She stood silently for a moment. He held her in his arms. Then she pulled herself away. 'You don't love me,' she said. 'You'll forget it in the morning.' She suddenly pulled Obi towards her and kissed him. Then she pushed him away. 'There's someone coming,' she said. She ran back along the deck and down to her cabin. CHAPTER FOUR Bribery and Corruption Obi's interest in Nigeria had become stronger when he was in England. He often went to meetings of the Nigerian Students' Union in London. He once gave a talk on the reasons for corruption in Nigeria. Obi said that there was corruption everywhere. Young men and old men were corrupt. But the reason for corruption was the old Africans at the top of the Nigerian Civil Service. The old men must be replaced by young men - young men who had been educated at university. When these young men were given important positions, they would stop the corruption. On his return to Nigeria, Obi soon found examples of bribery and corruption. When the boat arrived in Lagos, the first people to come onto the boat were the customs officers. A young man came to Obi's cabin. He saw that Obi was bringing back a radiogram. He told Obi that the duty on the radiogram was five pounds. 'Write a receipt for me,' Obi said to the young man. The young man looked at Obi for a few seconds. Then he said: 'I can make it two pounds.' 'How?' asked Obi. 'I do it, but you no get government receipt.' Obi became very angry. He said he would get a policeman. The young man ran from the cabin. Obi waited for another officer to come to his cabin. An officer came, after all the other passengers had gone. Obi was the last passenger to leave the boat. Obi soon found other examples of corruption. The Umuofia Progressive Union held a big meeting to welcome Obi back to Nigeria. The Secretary of the Union made a long speech. He praised the Umuofia Scholarship Scheme, which had made it possible for Obi to study in England. Now that Obi was back in Nigeria, he would get a good job in the Civil Service. He would be able to help other Umuofians. And, of course, Obi would repay the loan. The money would be used to send other Umuofians to study in England. After the speeches, the President of the Union spoke to Obi about his future. 'Have you been given a job yet?' 'Not yet,' replied Obi. 'I'm going to an interview on Monday.' 'Perhaps we should have a talk with the men on the Interview Board,' said the Secretary, who was standing beside the President. 'That will not be necessary,' said the President. 'Most of the men on the Board will be white men.' 'You think white man not take bribe?' said the Secretary. 'Come to our department. The white man take bribe more than black man nowadays.' CHAPTER FIVE 'Our Love Must Be a Secret' After the kiss on the boat, Obi fell in love with Clara. As soon as she was back in Lagos, Clara was given a job as a nurse in a big hospital. She lived in a small flat. Obi went to visit her. He asked her to marry him. She did not say no. But she would not let him buy her a ring. 'Wait until you get a job,' she said. 'Don't tell anybody about us,' she went on. 'Our love must be a secret.' After the meeting of the UPU, Obi went with Joseph to a restaurant for a meal. While they were eating, a long black car stopped outside the restaurant. Obi could see into the back of the car. A handsome young man came into the restaurant. Everybody turned to look at him. 'That's the Hon Sam Okoli,' whispered Joseph. The Honourable Sam Okoli was a well-known politician. He was over thirty, but he looked much younger. He was tall and handsome and smiled at everybody. But Obi was not looking at the Honourable Sam Okoli. Obi was looking at the long black car. There was a woman sitting in the back seat. It was Clara. 'Is that why she doesn't want to get married?' he asked himself angrily. Now I know why she doesn't want anyone to know about us, thought Obi. She's in love with this Honourable Gentleman - the Hon Sam Okoli. CHAPTER SIX The Interview There was more talk about bribery at Obi's interview. At first, the interview went well for Obi. The Chairman of the Interview Board was a fat, friendly Englishman. He was interested in literature and poetry. He asked Obi what poems he had studied at university. The two of them talked about poetry for a long time. The other members of the Board did not know anything about literature. They pretended to listen carefully. But one member was asleep. After some time, the Chairman turned to the other members. 'Have any of you any questions?' They all said no, except the member who had been asleep. He woke up suddenly and spoke. 'Why do you want a job in the Civil Service?' he asked. 'So that you can take bribes?' Obi was very angry. 'I don't know how to answer your question,' he said. 'If I wanted the job so I could take bribes, I would not tell the Board, would I? I don't think your question is very useful.' 'It's not for you to say which questions are useful,' said the Chairman, smiling. 'You will hear from us later.' Joseph was not happy when Obi told him about the interview. Obi thought that he had given a good answer to the question about taking bribes. But Joseph did not agree. 'You must be respectful to your superiors,' Joseph told him. 'You have been to university and you have read books. But I am older and wiser. I tell you that it is important to respect your superiors.' 'Nonsense,' said Obi. 'It was a silly question.' That evening, at supper, Obi asked Joseph about his girlfriends. 'You used to have lots of girlfriends,' said Obi. 'Where are all your girlfriends?' 'I'm going to get married,' replied Joseph. 'I haven't got any money to spend on girlfriends. I must save up to pay the bride price. I must save one hundred and thirty pounds. And I am only a clerk. On my salary, it is not easy to save money.' 'But there has been a new law passed about bride-price,' said Obi. 'The law says that no one must pay bride-price.' 'The law!' laughed Joseph. 'Everyone pays bride-price. It's higher than before. You will get a good job in the Civil Service and you will have to pay more. When you want to marry, you will have to pay a bride-price of five hundred pounds!' 'I'm not paying five hundred pounds for a wife,' said Obi. 'I'm not even going to pay fifty.' 'Then you will never get married,' said Joseph, with a loud laugh. CHAPTER SEVEN On the Road to Umuofia While he waited for the results of his interview, Obi went on a short visit to Umuofia, his hometown. He travelled first class. First class meant that he sat on the front seat with the lorry driver and a young woman with her baby. Two policemen stopped the lorry after they had travelled about forty miles from Lagos. 'Damn,' said the driver. 'What do they want?' 'Show me your papers,' said one policeman. The driver got out his papers from a box under the seat. The driver's mate went to talk to the other policeman. As the driver's mate was going to give something to the second policeman, the policeman saw Obi looking at them. 'What do you want?' the policeman shouted angrily at the driver's mate. 'Go away! You want me take bribe?' The first policeman found something wrong with the driver's papers. He took out a notebook and began to write. At last, the driver got back into the lorry and drove off. About a quarter of a mile along the road, he stopped. 'Why you stare at policeman when my mate try to give him two shillings?' he asked Obi angrily. 'Because it's wrong to take bribes,' replied Obi. 'Why you book people put your nose into other people's business?' asked the driver. 'When I see you, I know you make me trouble. All you book people the same. Now I pay ten shillings, not two. It was then that Obi understood why they had stopped. The driver's mate had run back to bribe the policeman. 'How much they take?' asked the driver when his mate returned. 'Ten shillings.' 'You see,' said the driver to Obi. 'You see what you do. Now I pay ten shillings, not two.' The driver did not speak to Obi for the rest of the journey. The woman with the baby fell asleep. Obi thought about Clara. He had asked her about her friendship with Sam Okoli. 'Are you in love with him?' Obi had asked her. 'Nonsense!' Clara had replied. 'Sam and I are old friends that's all.' And Obi knew that she was speaking the truth. But she still wanted their love to be a secret. Obi could not understand why. Obi slowly fell asleep, still thinking about Clara. Suddenly the lorry came to a stop. All the passengers woke up. 'What go wrong?' asked the passengers in the back of the lorry. 'I fall asleep,' said the driver. The passengers in the back of the lorry laughed. They began to sing songs to keep the driver awake. He started the lorry again and drove off. But Obi did not sleep for the rest of the journey. CHAPTER EIGHT Back Home At Umuofia, everyone was waiting on the road to welcome Obi. There were school bands and church bands playing music as he arrived. The whole village was having a feast. The old people were sitting in front of Mr Isaac Okonkwo's house. The villagers were worried that it might rain. The villagers had asked Isaac Okonkwo to visit the rainmaker and give him gifts. The rainmaker would make sure that it did not rain. But Isaac Okonkwo had refused. 'I am a Christian,' he told them. 'I do not believe in rainmakers. It will rain or it will not rain. God has already decided. Rainmakers cannot change God's decision.' There were hundreds of people at Isaac Okonkwo's house. After the first four hundred handshakes, Obi was able to sit down in the big room with his father and his older relatives. 'The white man's country must be far, far away,' said one of the old men. Everybody knew it was far away, but they wanted Obi to tell them about it. 'When I was on the boat,' said Obi, 'there were many days when I saw no land at all. No land in front, behind, to the right and to the left. The sea was all around us for day after day.' 'Think of that,' said the old man. 'No land for day after day!' 'Isaac,' said another old man to Mr Okonkwo, 'you must bring us a kola nut. We want to give thanks for this child's safe return.' 'This is a Christian house,' said Obi's father. 'Kola nut is eaten here. But we do not eat kola nut to please the spirits.' 'Who talked about pleasing the spirits?' said the old man. 'I want to give thanks for the child's safe return.' He stood up angrily and left the room. 'This isn't a time for quarrelling,' said another old man. 'Here, I shall give you a kola nut.' 'Do not trouble yourself,' said Mr Okonkwo. 'I will give you a kola nut.' Isaac Okonkwo went into an inner room and came back with three kola nuts. He put them in front of the oldest man in the room. The oldest man was not a Christian, but he knew how the Christians prayed. He said a prayer in which he spoke the name of Jesus and everybody was happy. When all the visitors had gone, Obi's mother came and greeted him. She put her arms round his neck and held him. Tears came into Obi's eyes. He saw that she had become old and thin. Obi saw that she was a sick woman. And Obi saw that his father too, was not well. He was thin and weak. Obi saw that they did not have enough to eat. Isaac Okonkwo had been a teacher in the church for thirty years. Now the church gave him two pounds a month. But most of the money was given back to the church. Mr and Mrs Okonkwo had eight children. Obi, his brother John and six daughters. The two youngest children were at church schools and Isaac had to pay their school fees. The youngest boy, John, was going to go to grammar school. They had to find the money for his school fees. The money from the church had never been enough. They had grown vegetables and sold them in the market. And his mother had made soap and sold it. But now they were too old to work. And they were too poor to buy the food they needed. It was shameful. After his father had said prayers, they all went to bed. Obi lay down but could not sleep. His father and mother needed help. When I get a job, Obi thought to himself, I must send them some money every month. But how much? Could he send them ten pounds a month? He had to pay back the loan from the UPU. He would have to pay them back twenty pounds every month. Would the Union let him pay the loan back later? He would ask them. Obi stopped thinking about money and started to think of Clara. Why had Clara said that he must not tell his parents about her? He wanted to tell his mother. His mother would be pleased to hear that he was going to get married. She had once said that she would be ready to die after she had seen his first child. Why did their love have to be secret? Why was he not allowed to tell anyone about her? It began to rain. The rain fell down onto the iron roof. Obi had forgotten it could rain so heavily in November. He stretched out comfortably and slowly fell asleep. CHAPTER NINE 'I Cannot Marry You' Obi had done well at the interview. He got a letter from the Board telling him that he had been given a job. He was to be a Senior Civil Servant in the Scholarship Board. He was to be Board Secretary. His job was to look at applications for government scholarships to overseas universities. When Obi arrived at the office of the Scholarship Board, he was taken to meet his boss, Mr Green. Mr Green did not get up from his chair and he did not shake hands with Obi. 'I hope you enjoy your work here,' Mr Green said to Obi. 'I'm sure you will find it enjoyable if you work hard and if you aren't a fool.' Obi was sent to work for a few days in Mr Omo's office. Mr Omo had worked in the Civil Service for thirty years. Obi was sent to work in Mr Omo's office in order to learn about the job. A few hours later, Mr Green came into Mr Omo's office. Mr Omo jumped to his feet as soon as Mr Green came in. 'Why hasn't the local leave file been brought to me?' Mr Green asked. 'I thought...' 'You are not paid to think, Mr Omo. You are paid to do what you are told. Is that clear? Now send the file to me immediately.' 'Yes, sir.' Obi decided that he did not like Mr Green or Mr Omo. Suddenly the telephone rang. Mr Omo picked it up as if it was going to bite him. 'It's for you,' he said to Obi. Obi took the telephone. 'Have you been given a letter to take to the car-dealers?' asked Mr Green. 'No, I haven't,' said Obi. 'You say sir to your senior officers, Mr Okonkwo,' said Mr Green and he put the phone down with a bang. Obi was given a letter to take to the car-dealers. The letter said that Obi was a Senior Civil Servant. So he was going to be given a loan to buy a car. Obi went to the car-dealer and showed him the letter. Obi was immediately given a new Morris Oxford. Later that morning, Mr Omo asked Obi to come to his office to sign a paper. 'What's this for?' asked Obi. 'It's for your clothing allowance,' said Mr Omo. 'You think Government give you sixty pounds without getting your signature?' The junior clerks in the office laughed at Mr Omo's joke. 'This is a wonderful day,' Obi told Clara on the phone. 'I've got sixty pounds in my pocket and I'm getting a new car at two o'clock. Let's go out to dinner.' Obi paid a driver ten pounds a month to drive the Morris Oxford. Later that day, he sat in the back of the car with Clara. The driver was taking them to a restaurant twelve miles outside Lagos. They were going there to have a special dinner. But neither the drive, nor the dinner, was a great success. Clara was not happy. Obi tried to make her smile. He told her about the government flat he had been given. The flat was in Ikoyi, an expensive part of Lagos. At one time, only Englishmen and their families lived there. But the news about Obi's new flat did not interest Clara. 'What's the matter?' Obi asked. 'Nothing. I don't feel very happy. That's all. I will tell you about it later.' 'When?' 'After dinner.' Neither of them are very much. After the meal, Clara wanted to go and see a film. Obi said no. He wanted to find out why she was so unhappy. They went for a walk. Obi tried to kiss Clara. 'I cannot marry you,' said Clara suddenly. And she burst out crying. 'I don't understand you,' said Obi. 'I really don't. Tell me, why can't you marry me?' She did not reply. She put her arms round him and began to weep. 'What's the matter, Clara? Tell me.' 'I am an osu,' she said as the tears ran down her cheeks. Suddenly she stopped crying and took a step back from him. Obi said nothing for a few seconds. He stood looking at her in silence. 'Now you see why we can't get married,' said Clara. 'Nonsense!' shouted Obi. He shouted the word loudly. He was trying to forget those few seconds - those few seconds when he had said nothing. It was very late when Obi got back to Joseph's small flat. He opened the door quietly, but the noise woke Joseph up. Obi sat down in a chair and told Joseph what Clara had told him. 'So that's the reason,' said Joseph. 'That's why this beautiful girl has not been married until now. You are lucky to have found out.' Joseph saw that Obi was not listening to him. 'I'm going to marry her,' Obi said. 'What!' Joseph sat up in bed. 'I'm going to marry her.' 'You are a fool,' said Joseph. 'Listen to me. Do you know what an osu is? But how can you know? Your long stay in England has made you forget.' 'Of course, I know. But I am going to marry the girl.' Joseph did not say anything more. He turned over in his bed and was soon asleep. Obi knew there would be many others, like Joseph, who would be against the marriage. But this was the twentieth century! It was unbelievable! It was shameful that people still believed in such a thing. Many, many years ago, Clara's great-great-great-great grandfather had become the servant of a god. He had become an osu. His children and his children's children had all become osu. An ordinary person could never marry someone who was an osu. 'But I will marry Clara,' said Obi, as he lay down on the bed. 'No one - not even my mother can stop me.' On the following day, Obi met Clara at half past two. He immediately told her that they were going to buy an engagement ring. 'But I haven't said that I will marry...' 'Don't argue,' said Obi. 'I'm moving into my new flat in Ikoyi tomorrow and we have a lot to do. I haven't got any pots or pans.' They were driven in the Morris Oxford to Kingsway, the biggest shopping centre. They went into a jeweller's shop and bought a ring for twenty pounds. Obi was spending his clothing allowance very quickly. Then Clara said that he must buy a Bible. 'Why a Bible?' asked Obi. 'You always give a Bible with an engagement ring. Don't you know that?' When they had bought an expensive Bible, they went shopping for pots and pans and other things for Obi's flat. At first, Obi was interested in buying the things that were needed for the flat. But after an hour, he lost interest. Clara was never happy with anything. They went from one shop to another. But Clara always found a reason for not buying something. Obi followed her round like an obedient dog. When Obi got back to Joseph's room, it was nearly eleven o'clock. But Joseph was not asleep. He was waiting for Obi to come back. Joseph wanted to talk to Obi about Clara. 'How is Clara?' Joseph began. Obi did not want to talk about Clara immediately. He talked about the shopping and the drive in the car. Then he added: 'By the way, we are now engaged. I gave her a ring this afternoon.' This news surprised Joseph and made him unhappy. 'Are you going to follow the custom and ask your family to meet her family?' 'I don't know yet,' replied Obi. 'I will have to ask my father.' 'Your father will not agree to this marriage. I'm sure of that.' 'I will talk to my father,' replied Obi. 'He will agree. And my mother too.' But Obi knew that his family would not agree to him marrying an osu. If my mother agrees, he thought, everything will be all right. 'You don't know what you are doing,' said Joseph. 'If you marry an osu, your children and your children's children will become osu. One day in the future, anybody will be able to marry anybody. But that day has not come yet.' 'It's too late now,' said Obi. 'I have given her an engagement ring.' 'Our fathers did not marry with engagement rings,' said Joseph. 'It is not too late to stop the marriage. Remember, you are the first Umuofian to be educated in England. What will the poor men and women who gave you the money to go to England think of such a marriage? They will not be pleased.' Obi was beginning to get angry. 'The money was given as a loan. I will pay back every penny.' CHAPTER TEN At the Meeting The Umuofia Progressive Union held a meeting on the first Saturday of every month. The next meeting took place on 1st December 1956. Obi remembered that date, because it was important in his life. It was the day when things began to go wrong. Joseph phoned Obi from his office. 'You have not forgotten the meeting?' he asked. 'It begins at half past four.' 'Of course not,' said Obi. 'I'll meet you at four o'clock.' When he put the phone down, Joseph told the other clerks in his office: 'That was my good friend. He just back from overseas. BA Honours.' 'What department he do work in?' asked one of the clerks. 'Secretary to the Scholarship Board,' replied Joseph. 'He go make plenty money there,' said the clerk. 'Every student who want go England go see him at house.' 'He not be man like that,' said Joseph. 'Him gentleman. Him no take bribe.' 'That true?' asked the other. But he was sure that it was not true. All Civil Servants took bribes. At a quarter past four, Obi arrived at Joseph's office in his new Morris Oxford. That was why Joseph was looking forward to this meeting. He was going to arrive with Obi in his new car. It was going to be a great day for the Umuofia Progressive Union when one of their sons arrived in a car. Obi and Joseph's arrival in the car was a great success. All the members clapped their hands and cheered and danced when they saw the car arrive. Obi was given a seat beside the President. He had to answer lots of questions about his job and about his car. At last, the meeting began. They talked about the problem of Joshua Udo, a messenger in the Post Office. Joshua had lost his job because he had been sleeping at work. Now he wanted the UPU to lend him ten pounds to help him to get another job. Everyone knew why Joshua needed the money. It would be used to bribe someone to give him a job. Before the members agreed to give him the loan, the President spoke to Joshua. 'You did not come four hundred miles from Umuofia to Lagos to sleep. You came here to work. If you don't want to work, you should go back to Umuofia.' One of the members disagreed with the President. 'It is not work that brings us here to Lagos,' he said. 'It is money. Anyone who wants to work can stay at home. There is plenty of work in Umuofia. He can clear the land and dig the hard soil. He can work to the end of his days, but he will not get any money.' Everyone agreed that they had come to Lagos for money and not for work. Then Obi was asked to speak. He thanked them for the kind welcome they had given him on his return from England. 'And I will always remember,' said Obi, 'that it was you who made it possible for me to go to England. I wish to thank you all for the help you gave me.' Obi began his speech in Ibo. Later he spoke sometimes in Ibo and sometimes in English. This pleased the members of the Union. They understood Obi when he spoke in Ibo. And they pretended that they understood him when he spoke in English. At last, Obi spoke about the loan, which the Union had given him. 'I have a small request to make,' said Obi. 'As you know, it is not easy to live in a new place. It costs a lot of money.' All the members laughed. 'My request is that you wait four months before I start to pay back the loan.' 'Your words are very good,' said the President when Obi finished his speech. 'I do not think anyone here will say no to your request. We will wait for four months. Are we all agreed?' 'Ya!' the members all shouted in reply. 'But before we finish,' went on the President. 'I want to speak to you like a father. You know book. I do not know book. But I have lived a long time and I am older than you. So I am not afraid to talk to you.' Obi's heart began to beat quickly. What was the President going to say? 'Lagos is a bad place for a young man,' the President went on. 'You get a very good salary. You get more in one month than some of your brothers here get in one year. I have already said we will wait for four months before you start to pay off the loan. We can wait one year. But are we doing you any good? 'Your salary is more than enough for you. But it will not be enough if you get into bad ways. Remember, we have all come from Umuofia. We are here to help our town and our families. We must not drink because we see our neighbours drinking. We must not run after bad women because we see our neighbours running after bad women. 'You can ask why I am saying all this. I have heard that you have been seen with an unsuitable woman. I have heard that you are planning to marry this woman who is unsuitable...' Obi jumped to his feet. He was shaking with anger. 'Please sit down, Mr Okonkwo,' said the President quietly. But Obi did not sit down. 'You cannot speak about any woman like this,' he shouted. 'I am not going to listen to you. Forget about my request. I will start paying now. This minute.' Obi moved towards the door. A number of people tried to stop him. 'Please sit down!' 'Don't leave!' Everyone was talking at the same time. Obi pushed his way through the crowd and ran to his car. Many members ran after him asking him to come back. 'Drive off!' Obi shouted to the driver as soon as he got into the car. Joseph pulled the car door, trying to open it. 'Obi, please! Please come back!' he shouted. 'Get out!' shouted Obi. The car drove off. Halfway to Ikoyi, Obi told the driver to turn round and drive back to Lagos, to Clara's flat. CHAPTER ELEVEN Temptation Obi began to like his job. He was given an office. Mr Green's attractive, English secretary was in the same office. Her name was Miss Tomlinson. Obi did not see Mr Omo and Mr Green very often. He saw Mr Green when he ran in to shout orders at him or Miss Tomlinson. 'He's a strange man,' Miss Tomlinson said once when Mr Green had gone out. 'But he's not a bad man.' 'Of course not,' replied Obi. Obi agreed with Miss Tomlinson because he knew she might be a spy. Secretaries were often put in the same office as an African to spy on them. They always pretended to be friendly. Obi knew that he had to be careful when he was speaking to Miss Tomlinson. As the weeks passed, Obi began to like Miss Tomlinson. One day, Clara came to see Obi at the office. When Clara left, Miss Tomlinson praised her. 'Isn't she beautiful? Aren't you a lucky man? When are you going to get married?' After that, Obi and Miss Tomlinson became friends. He was sure that she was not a spy. One day, the telephone rang and Miss Tomlinson answered it. 'It's for you, Mr Okonkwo,' she said. 'There's a gentleman downstairs who wants to see you.' Obi went downstairs. A man was waiting for him. 'Good morning,' said Obi. 'My name is Okonkwo.' 'My name is Mark. How do you do?' They shook hands. 'I've come to talk to you about something, Mr Okonkwo,' said Mr Mark. 'Come up to my office. We can talk there.' 'Thank you very much.' Mr Mark followed Obi upstairs. Obi opened the door of his office. Mr Mark stepped in. He stopped suddenly when he saw Miss Tomlinson. But he smiled at her and said, 'Good morning.' 'Sit down Mr Mark,' said Obi. 'Now, tell me, how can I help you?' Obi was very surprised when Mr Mark began to speak in Ibo. 'Is it all right if we speak in Ibo?' asked Mr Mark. 'I didn't know there was a European in the office with you.' 'If you wish to,' replied Obi. 'It's about my sister,' began Mr Mark. 'She has just passed her School Certificate with Grade One. She wants to apply for a scholarship to study in England.' Mr Mark spoke in Ibo. But there were some words he had to say in English. Words like "School Certificate" and "scholarship". Mr Mark spoke very quietly when he said these words. 'You have come for application forms?' asked Obi. 'No, no. I have got these. I have come to see you because you are Secretary of the Scholarship Board. We are both Ibos and I want to speak to you like a brother. You know what happens in our country. If you do not see people, you...' 'It is not necessary to see anyone,' said Obi. 'Send in the application forms and...' 'I wanted to see you at your house,' said Mr Mark. 'But I did not know where you lived.' 'I'm sorry, Mr Mark,' said Obi in English. 'But I can't help you.' Mr Mark was surprised when Obi spoke in English. 'I'm sorry, Mr Okonkwo. Perhaps this is the wrong place to talk about...' 'I am a busy man,' said Obi, again in English. 'If you have nothing else to say...' 'I'm sorry to trouble you.' Mr Mark stood up quickly and went to the door. For the rest of the morning, Obi felt very happy. He had said no. He had refused a bribe. Everyone said: It is not easy to refuse a bribe... you may make more trouble by refusing a bribe... than by taking it... you may make trouble by taking a bribe, and then not doing the thing for which the bribe is given... if you refuse a bribe, perhaps a 'brother or a 'friend!' will pretend to be working for you. He will take the bribe and say it is for you... Obi now knew that all these sayings were nonsense. He had refused a bribe. All you had to say was, 'I'm sorry, Mr -. But I can't help you.' But Obi had to agree that a man could be tempted. Everyone needed money. And Obi was finding it more and more impossible to live on his salary. Each month, he got forty-seven pounds and ten shillings. But he had very little money left at the end of the month. Every month, he had to pay twenty pounds to the Umuofia Progressive Union and send ten pounds to his parents. And what about the school fees for his young brother, John? Where were they going to come from? Obi went back to his flat at Ikoyi. After lunch, Obi heard a car stop outside the block of flats. Obi did not know any of the Europeans who lived in the block of flats. Only one of them spoke to him. An Englishman came to his door once a month to ask for ten shillings. This was to pay for the boy who worked in the garden. It's a visitor for one of the Europeans, Obi thought. The car started again. It was a taxi. There was a quiet knock on Obi's door. Who could it be? Clara was working at the hospital that afternoon. Perhaps it was Joseph. Joseph was trying to make friends again with Obi. Joseph had told the President of the UPU about Clara. Joseph had thought that the President would speak alone with Obi and stop him marrying this unsuitable woman. Obi was ready to forget what Joseph had done. But Clara hated Joseph. She never wanted to see him again. She had liked Joseph very much before, but now she hated him with all her heart. Obi was surprised at the hate he saw in Clara. Obi opened the door. He thought Joseph would be standing there. But he got a surprise. There was a girl standing at the door. 'Good afternoon,' he said with a smile. 'I'm looking for Mr Okonkwo,' she said. 'That's me,' said Obi, again with a smile. 'Come in. Please sit down. I don't think we have met before.' 'No, I'm Elsie Mark.' 'Pleased to meet you, Miss Mark.' The girl smiled at Obi. She looked very beautiful. 'You must be surprised at my visit,' she said in Ibo. As soon as she spoke in Ibo, Obi knew why she had come. The smile left his face. 'I'm sorry my brother came to your office this morning. I told him not to.' Obi did not know what to say. He spoke quickly. 'That's all right,' he said. 'I told your brother that... you did very well in your examinations... you had a very good Grade One Certificate. Now you must... you must do well at the interview with the Board.' 'The most important thing is that I am asked to go for an interview.' 'Yes, I agree,' said Obi. 'But sometimes people with Grade Two or Grade Three are asked to go for an interview but people with Grade One are not asked.' 'Perhaps that happens sometimes,' said Obi. 'But... I'm sorry, would you like a drink... would you... would you like a Coca-Cola?' He went to the kitchen, trying to think what to say to this beautiful girl. She took the glass and thanked him. They sat looking at each other. Suddenly she spoke. 'Last year, three of the girls in our school got Grade One Certificates. But none of them were given a scholarship.' 'Perhaps they did not do well at the interview.' 'No, that wasn't the reason. The reason was that they did not see the members of the Board at home.' 'So you are going to see all the members?' 'Yes.' 'Is a scholarship as important as that?' asked Obi. 'Why doesn't your father or another relation pay for you to go to university?' 'Our father spent all his money on our brother.' 'Was that the man who came to see me today?' 'Yes. He went to England to study medicine, but he failed his exams. He was in England for twelve years. He came back when our father died. He came back without a degree. Now he is a teacher in a secondary school. And we have no more money. 'Please Mr Okonkwo, you must help. I'll do anything you ask.' Obi liked the girl. She was intelligent. But why was it so important for her to get a university degree? Because a university degree had magic power. It changed a clerk with a salary of one hundred and fifty pounds a year into a Senior Civil Servant with a salary of five hundred and seventy pounds a year - with a car and a flat in the best part of town. What powerful magic! 'I'm sorry... very sorry... but I... I can't make any promises.' At that moment, a car stopped outside the block of flats and Clara came in. She was surprised when she saw the girl. 'Hello, Clara. This is Miss Mark.' Clara was not pleased to see this beautiful girl in Obi's flat. The girl stood up. 'I must be going now,' she said. 'I'm sorry, I can't make any promises,' said Obi. The girl smiled sadly. 'How are you getting back to town?' asked Obi. 'It's not easy to get a taxi from here. I'll take you in my car. Come on, Clara.' On the drive back to Obi's flat, Clara wanted to know all about the girl. Who was she? What was she doing in Obi's flat? Had Clara come in at the wrong time?' Obi told Clara she was talking nonsense. He told her about the man who had come to the office in the morning. Then he told her why the girl had come to the flat. When he had finished speaking, Clara said nothing. 'That's the truth,' said Obi. 'I think you should have listened to the man,' said Clara. 'The man wanted to give you money and you did not listen to him. But the girl wanted to do anything for you and you gave her a drink and drove her back to town. Giving money is not as bad as giving someone your body.' Obi did not know what to say. CHAPTER TWELVE Money Troubles Mr Green once spoke to Obi in a friendly way. It was on the day when he had given Obi the letter to take to the car-dealers. Mr Green had spoken about the insurance on the car. 'Remember,' Mr Green had said, 'you will have to pay insurance every year. A day will come when you have to find the money to pay the insurance.' But Obi had forgotten Mr Green's words. He had forgotten about the insurance until the day came one year later. And now the letter was on the table in front of him. Forty-two pounds! Where was he going to find forty-two pounds? He had only thirteen pounds in the bank. He would have to go to the bank manager and ask for a loan. No one can say that I have spent my money badly, Obi said to himself. My mother was very ill. She had to go to hospital. I had to send thirty-five pounds home last month. If I had not sent that money home, I could have paid the insurance. Obi had made friends again with the Union. The President had told him they would wait for the loan to be paid back. But Obi had refused. He had told the President he now had enough money. He did not need to wait to pay back the loan. The members of UPU had helped Obi to become a Senior Civil Servant. He now had a large salary and he was given a car loan. But he was not given money to pay for the insurance. He was not given money to pay for all the other things that he needed. A Senior Civil Servant cannot live like a poor villager in Umuofia. Obi got a loan from the bank. He was able to pay the insurance. But there were other things which would soon have to be paid for. He would have to pay for the car licence. He would have to pay for new tyres. The old tyres were dangerous. Four new tyres would cost thirty pounds. Then there was the electricity bill - another five pounds. Where was the money going to come from? Obi knew he must save money. He told his servant to spend less money in the market. Every room in the flat had two electric light bulbs. Obi went round the flat and took out one of the bulbs in each room. Then he turned off the water-heater. In future, he would wash in cold water. The servant thought Obi had gone mad! CHAPTER THIRTEEN A Quarrel With Clara Obi was in love with Clara. But they often had quarrels. Obi had studied English Literature. He liked to talk about poetry. But Clara knew nothing about poetry. She liked to go to the cinema. But Obi hated the films they went to see. Once, Obi had sat beside Clara in the cinema. But he had refused to look at the film. Clara had said it was 'a very good film'. But Obi thought it was terrible. 'I have to sit and listen while you read poetry to me,' said Clara. 'So you must sit with me and watch the films that I like.' But these quarrels were not very important. They were the quarrels, which lovers always have. But Obi and Clara had a bigger quarrel - about Obi's money troubles. One evening, Obi went to visit Clara. Clara immediately saw that he was worried and unhappy. 'What's wrong?' she asked. 'Nothing is wrong,' replied Obi. But Clara knew he was not telling the truth. She refused to talk to him and they sat together without talking. At last, he had to tell her about the loan from the bank. 'Why didn't you tell me?' she asked. 'Why didn't you tell me about your money troubles?' 'I have no money troubles,' said Obi. Clara did not reply. She picked up a magazine and started to read. 'You shouldn't read when you have a visitor,' said Obi. Clara began to cry. 'Clara,' he said, putting his arm round her shoulders. 'Clara.' But she did not reply. She turned over the pages in the magazine without looking at them. 'Perhaps I should go,' said Obi. Clara said nothing. Obi stood up. 'Goodbye.' Clara sat turning the pages of the magazine. 'Bye-bye,' she said, without looking at him. The next morning, a parcel arrived for Obi in his office. It was from Clara. Obi carefully opened the parcel. What was he going to find? Had Clara sent him back his engagement ring? Was their love at an end? There was no ring inside the parcel. There were ten five pound notes. And there was a message from Clara. Darling, I'm sorry about last night. Go to the bank immediately and pay back the loan. See you tonight. Love, Clara Obi's eyes began to fill with tears. Where had Clara got so much money? She got a good salary as a nurse. And she had gone to England on a government scholarship. She did not have to pay back the money. But fifty pounds was a lot of money. How had she got it? He knew that he could not take the money. He had to give it back to her. But how? He had to find a way. He did not want to quarrel with her again. Clara was getting ready to go out when Obi arrived. 'We're meeting Sam Okoli and his girlfriend tonight,' she told him. 'We're going to a dance at the Imperial Club. What did the bank manager say when you paid him back the money?' 'I did not go to the bank,' replied Obi. 'How can I take so much money from you? It's not possible.' 'It's only a loan,' said Clara. 'If you don't want it, you can give it back to me.' She held out her hand. Obi took her hand and pulled her towards him. But he did not give her back the money. 'Thank you for your help,' he said. 'It's very kind of you to want to help me.' They went to the Imperial Club in Obi's car. He was now able to drive the car and did not have a driver. The car park at the Imperial was full of cars. At last, Obi found a place to park. He was helped by a number of small boys. 'Me look your car for you,' they all shouted together. 'OK,' replied Obi. 'You look him well.' 'Lock your door carefully,' Obi said quietly to Clara. Obi and Clara met the Hon Sam Okoli and his girlfriend in the Imperial. They drank together and they danced. It was a happy evening. And Obi was pleased that it was not an expensive evening. They did not drink beer or champagne which were very expensive. At two o'clock in the morning, they left the Imperial. Clara and Obi said goodnight to the Hon Sam Okoli and his girlfriend. They walked hack to the car. Obi unlocked the door on his side and leant over to open the door for Clara. But her door was unlocked. 'Didn't I tell you to lock your door?' 'I did lock it,' she said. 'Oh, no!' cried Obi. 'What's wrong?' asked Clara. 'Your money.' 'Where is it? Where did you leave it?' Obi pointed at the glove box. It was empty. He quietly got out of the car. He looked around. The car park was empty. Clara opened her door and got out too. She took his hand in hers and said, 'Let's go.' Obi was shaking. 'Let's go, Obi,' she said again, and opened the car door for him. CHAPTER FOURTEEN Back to Umuofia After Christmas, Obi got a letter from his father. His mother was ill in hospital again. Obi's father wanted Obi to take local leave and come home. Local leave was given to all Senior Civil Servants. It had been given at first to Europeans in the Civil Service. But now it was given to Nigerians. Mr Green thought this was wrong. 'The reason for local leave,' he told Obi, 'was to give Europeans a holiday in a cool place away from the heat of Lagos. But you Nigerians don't need local leave.' Obi said that it was not his business. It was for the government to decide. When Mr Green had left the office, Obi read his father's letter again. He saw that his father wanted to speak with him about an important matter. Obi knew what the 'important matter' was. His parents had heard about Clara. Obi had written to them some months ago. He had told them that there was a girl he wanted to marry. But he had not told them she was an osu. But now he knew that someone else had told them. Obi was given leave from 10th to 24th February. He was going to go to Umuofia by car. He was going to leave very early in the morning. He would stay the night in Benin and reach Umuofia the next day. Clara spent the whole day - and the whole night - in Obi's flat to help him with his packing. When they were in bed, Clara said that she had something to tell Obi. She began to cry. 'What's wrong? What's wrong?' he asked. At last she spoke. 'Perhaps it's wrong to get married,' she said. 'I have thought about everything carefully. There are two reasons why we should not get married.' 'What are they?' asked Obi. 'Your family will be against our marriage. I don't want to make trouble between you and your family.' 'Nonsense,' said Obi. 'Now tell me, what's the second reason?' But she refused to tell him what the second reason was. It wasn't important. 'I'll tell you what the other reason is,' he said angrily. 'You don't want to marry a man who cannot pay his insurance.' He knew that this was not true. She started to cry again. He pulled her towards him and began to kiss her. 'I'm very sorry, darling,' he said. Obi started his journey at six in the morning. Although he had two weeks leave, Obi was going to stay only one week in Umuofia. He did not have enough money to stay for two weeks. Everyone in Umuofia knew he had a large salary. They would want him to spend a lot of money. But Obi had very little money to spend. He had exactly thirty-four pounds. Twenty-five pounds was the local leave allowance, which was paid to all Senior Civil Servants. The rest was what was left from his January salary. Thirty-four pounds was enough to spend on two weeks' leave at home. But sixteen pounds, ten shillings had to be paid for his younger brother John's school fees. This did not leave him enough to spend on giving feasts for the villagers. 'Where is Mother?' he asked as soon as he arrived at the house. 'Your mother came back from hospital last week,' said his father. 'She is in her room.' Obi looked at his mother lying on her bed. She looked very ill. Tears came into his eyes. 'I am much better now,' said his mother. 'You did not see me when I was ill. Now I am much better. How is your work? Are Umuofia people in Lagos well? How is Joseph?' 'They are all well. Yes, very well. Yes, yes.' But his heart was full of sadness as he spoke. CHAPTER FIFTEEN 'I Shall Kill Myself' Obi talked with his father when the rest of the family had gone to bed. 'You wrote to me some time ago about a girl,' his father began. 'You said you were thinking of marrying her.' 'This is why I have come,' said Obi. 'I want to talk to you about the marriage. I have not enough money to get married now. But we can talk about it.' 'Do we know this girl? Where does she come from? What is her name?' 'She is a daughter of Okeke, a family in Mbaino.' 'Which Okeke?' asked Obi's father. 'I know three families in Mbaino of that name. One was a schoolteacher. But I'm sure it is not that one.' 'That is the one,' said Obi. 'Josiah Okeke?' 'That is his name.' 'You cannot marry this girl,' said his father. 'Why?' 'Her family is osu.' 'That is not important,' said Obi. 'We are Christians. We do not believe in osu. The Bible says that all men are the same. Before they knew Christ, our fathers believed in spirits. An osu was a man given to a god. And we did not marry his children or his children's children. But now we are Christians. We do not believe in osu.' There was a long silence. 'I know Josiah Okeke very well,' said Mr Okonkwo. 'He is a good man and a good Christian. But he and his family are osu. Our people think osu is like a terrible disease - a disease which cannot be cured. Please, my son, do not bring this disease into your family. Who will marry your daughters? Whose daughters will marry your sons? Think of that, my son.' 'But all this will change. In ten years' time osu will be forgotten.' The old man shook his head sadly, but said no more. Obi did not sleep well that night. But he was not unhappy. His father had asked him not to marry Clara. But he had not said that he must not marry Clara. As soon as he woke up, Obi went to see his mother. It was still dark, but she was awake. She had not slept much because of the pain in her stomach. 'I had a bad dream one night,' she said to Obi. 'I dreamt that I felt something on my skin. I looked down and saw that there were ants all over my body. They had eaten up the bed under me. I did not know the meaning of this strange dream. 'In the morning, your father came in with a letter from Joseph. In the letter, Joseph told us that you were going to marry an osu. I then knew the meaning of my dream. It meant my death. 'I will only say one thing. If you want to marry this girl, then wait until I am dead. You will not have long to wait.' She stopped speaking. Obi was afraid when he saw the mad look on her face. 'Mother!' he cried. 'If you do marry this girl while I am alive, I will kill myself.' She fell back on the bed and said nothing more. Obi went back to his room and stayed there for the rest of the day. Friends and relatives came to the house to see him. But he refused to see anyone. He said that he was sick after the long journey. That night, his father came into his room. His father asked how he was. Obi said nothing. His father sat beside the bed and said nothing also. 'I shall go back to Lagos the day after tomorrow,' said Obi. 'You said you were going to stay for a week.' 'I think it would be better if I leave earlier.' CHAPTER SIXTEEN More Trouble When he got back to Lagos, Obi went to see Clara. He told Clara about his visit to Umuofia. He told her what his father and mother had said about their marriage. 'Everything will be all right,' he said. 'My mother has not been very well for a long time. All we have to do is wait.' Clara listened. When he stopped talking, she looked at him. She asked him if he had finished. He did not answer. 'Have you finished?' she asked again. 'Finished what?' 'Your story.' Obi said nothing. 'It is not important,' said Clara. 'I should have known from the beginning that it would end this way.' 'What are you talking about?' asked Obi. She took the engagement ring off her finger and held it out to him. 'What are you doing?' he asked. 'If you don't take it, I will throw it out of the window.' 'If you want.' Clara did not throw the ring out of the window. She went outside to the car. She opened the door and put the ring in the glove box. Clara came back into the room. She went to the window and looked outside. They sat in silence for a long time. At last, Clara spoke, 'Isn't it time you were going?' 'Yes,' he said, and got up. 'There was something I wanted to tell you,' said Clara. 'But it is not important now. I should have been more careful. I should have taken better care of myself.' Obi was shaking. 'What is it?' he asked. But he knew immediately what was wrong. The first doctor Obi and Clara went to was an old man. Obi told the doctor what they wanted. At first, the old doctor was ready to help. But then he said he would not help. 'I'm sorry,' he said. 'I can't help you. I could be sent to prison. Why don't you marry the girl? She is very beautiful.' 'I don't want to marry him,' said Clara. 'What wrong with him?' asked the doctor. 'He looks a nice young man to me.' 'I say I don't want to marry him,' she shouted. 'Isn't that enough?' The next doctor they went to was young and wanted money. 'I shall do it for you if you can pay me,' he said. 'I want thirty pounds.' Obi asked the doctor if he would do it for less than thirty pounds. But the young doctor said no. 'I'm sorry,' he said. 'It is a small operation, but I could be sent to prison. Go and think about it. If you want the operation done, come back tomorrow at two with the money.' As they were leaving, the doctor asked Obi: 'Why don't you marry her?' Obi did not reply. CHAPTER SEVENTEEN Obi is Afraid Obi now had to find thirty pounds. And it had to be found before two o'clock the next day. There was also the fifty pounds he must give back to Clara. He counted the money he had brought back from Umuofia. There was twelve pounds and a few coins. He had given only five pounds to his mother and nothing to his father. Obi did not know what to do. He could go to a moneylender. The moneylender would loan Obi thirty pounds. But Obi would have to sign a paper to say he had been loaned sixty! Obi would have to pay back a loan of sixty pounds. That was impossible. He could never do that. Obi thought of going to the President of the UPU. But that was also impossible. The President would want to know why he needed the money. No. He could not go to the UPU for help. Then Obi remembered the Honourable Sam Okoli. He was a friend of Clara's. Obi was sure he would help. But Obi decided not to tell the Honourable Sam Okoli why he wanted the money. Obi and Clara arrived at the doctor's house at two o'clock. The doctor counted the money carefully. Then he folded the notes and put them in his pocket. 'Come back at five o'clock,' he told Obi. But Obi could not drive away. He sat in the car and waited. He was terribly afraid. He was sure that something was going to go wrong. He saw Clara come out with the doctor. They got into a car. Clara saw Obi in his car, but she quickly turned her eyes away. Obi wanted to get out of his car and shout: 'Stop. Let's go and get married now.' But he could not and did not. The doctor's car drove away. Obi suddenly made up his mind. He had to stop the operation. He started the car and drove down the street. He tried to follow the doctor's car. But it was too late. The car had gone and he did not know where. Obi drove through the streets of Lagos all afternoon. He looked everywhere for the doctor's car. At last he stopped. He did not know where he was. The afternoon heat was terrible. It was the hottest time of the year. Obi wanted to die. At five o'clock, he drove back to the doctor's house. The doctor was not there. Obi waited an hour and a half. At last, the doctor came back without Clara. 'Where is she?' asked Obi. 'Don't worry. She'll be all right. But I want her to stay in hospital for the night.' Next morning, Obi was at the doctor's house early. But there were many people waiting to see the doctor. Obi pushed his way to the front. As soon as the doctor's door opened, he walked in. 'Where is she?' shouted Obi. 'There's nothing to worry about,' the doctor said. 'There's been a little trouble. That's all. A friend of mine is looking after her in hospital.' The doctor gave Obi the name of the hospital. In the hospital, a nurse told Obi that Clara was very ill. Visitors were not allowed to see her. CHAPTER EIGHTEEN The Death of Mrs Okonkwo After his leave ended, Obi went back to work. Bad news was waiting for him. 'How much of your leave allowance have you spent?' Mr Omo asked him. Obi did not understand why Mr Omo wanted to know. 'The twenty-five pounds is for your travel expenses,' said Mr Omo. 'You have to pay back any money you have not spent on travelling.' Obi looked at a map to find the distance from Lagos to Umuofia. It was not far enough. Obi would have to pay back ten pounds! So he told Mr Omo that he had gone to the Cameroons. He had spent all the money on travelling. Obi was now in terrible trouble. He made a decision. He would stop paying back the money to the UPU. And he would not tell them. When they asked him why he was not paying the money, he would say that he needed the money to help his family. They would understand that. They all had to help their families. But more bad news was waiting for him in the office the next day. There was a letter on his desk. Obi had forgotten about income tax. He had to pay tax on his salary every year. Now he had to find thirty-two pounds! And another letter arrived for him. It was a letter he had sent to Clara in hospital. He looked at it and saw that it had not been opened. Clara had sent it back to him unopened. Obi had written the letter because she had refused to see him in the hospital. When he had gone to see her, she had turned away from him. After that, she had told the nurses not to let him in again. Clara was in hospital for seventy days. As soon as she was better, she left Lagos and went home. Obi had wanted to pay her the fifty pounds. But he was not able to do this. He did not have enough money. Then came more bad news. His mother died. He sent as much money as he could to pay for the funeral. He decided not to go back to Umuofia himself. It was better to send money than spend it on petrol. But the money Obi sent was not enough. A member of the UPU had been at home when she died. He told everyone that it was shameful. Mrs Okonkwo had given birth to a son who had been educated in England. She should have had a much better funeral. And it was a greater shame that Obi had not gone to Umuofia for the funeral. Mr Green gave him two days' leave. He went home and locked himself in his flat. He lay on the bed until he heard a knock at the door. It was Joseph. Joseph arrived with a box of cold beer. People from Umuofia began to arrive. They greeted Obi and said they were sad to hear of his mother's death. Obi sat in a chair and said nothing. The others sat round and talked to one another. Joseph gave them the cold beer. At last, they all went and Obi was left alone. For some days, Obi felt a terrible sadness. He thought about his mother. He remembered her when he was a young boy. He remembered how she had taken care of him. The days passed and the sadness went away. Obi was back at work and he had other things to think about. CHAPTER NINETEEN 'Why Did He Do It?' It was the time for scholarships once again. There was a lot of work to do. One afternoon, Obi was getting ready to do some work at home. A large car stopped outside the block of flats. A Nigerian got out of the car. He looked like a very rich businessman. Who could it be? The man knocked at Obi's door. Obi went to open it. 'Good afternoon,' said Obi. 'Good afternoon,' said the man. 'Are you Mr Okonkwo?' Obi said yes and invited the man in. 'Please sit down.' 'My son is going to England in September,' said the man. 'I want him to get a scholarship. Here is fifty pounds, if you can help me.' Obi told the man that it was not possible. 'I do not give the scholarships,' said Obi. 'My job is to make a list of the best students. These students will then go for an interview before the Scholarship Board.' 'Make sure my son's name is on that list,' said the man. 'That's all you have to do.' Obi remembered the boy's name. He had good results in the exam. His name was sure to be on the list. 'Why don't you pay for him?' asked Obi. 'You have money. The scholarship is for poor people.' The man laughed. 'No man in this world has enough money.' He stood up and put some five-pound notes on Obi's table. 'This is a small gift,' he said. 'We will be friends and I will see you again. Don't forget his name.' The money lay on the table all day and all night. Obi put a newspaper on top of the money. This is terrible! he said to himself. Terrible! He woke up in the middle of the night. He lay in bed, thinking. He did not go to sleep again for a long time afterwards. 'You dance very well,' Obi told the young girl. He held her in his arms and kissed her on the lips. They forgot about the music and the dancing. They went into Obi's bedroom. She had done well in the exams. She was sure to be asked to go for an interview before the Scholarship Board. But it was shameful. Obi knew that. He drove her back to town in his car. Other people came. Sometimes it was the students themselves. Sometimes it was their fathers. One man told another: 'The Secretary to the Board takes money, but he always does what he promises.' There was one thing, which Obi would not do. He would not help anyone who did not have good results in the exams. Time passed and he was able to pay back all the loans. Obi should have been happier. But he was not. He was very unhappy. Then one day he had a visitor. The man brought twenty pounds. Obi knew that he could not go on. Obi sat and looked at the money on the table. He did not want to look at it. But he was not able to turn his eyes away. There was a knock at the door. Obi picked up the money and ran to the bedroom. There was another knock at the door. Obi pushed the notes into his pocket and went to the door. Obi opened the door. Two men came in. One was his visitor and the other was a stranger. 'Are you Mr Obi Okonkwo?' the stranger asked. Obi said yes, in a quiet voice. The room began to go round and round. The stranger was saying something. But Obi could not understand what he was saying. They searched Obi and found the notes in his pocket. A small mark had been made on each of the notes. Obi had to agree that he had taken them. The stranger went on talking about bribery and corruption. The other man phoned the police and asked them to send a police car. Epilogue The Judge, Mr Green, the man from the British Council, the President of the Umuofia Progressive Union - none of them understood why Obi Okonkwo had taken the bribe. Now we have read the story of Obi Okonkwo, do we understand why? - THE END -
<|book_end|>

<|book_start|>
CHAPTER ONE Okonkwo was well known throughout the nine villages and even beyond. His fame rested on solid personal achievements. As a young man of eighteen he had brought honour to his village by throwing Amalinze the Cat. Amalinze was the great wrestler who for seven years was unbeaten, from Umuofia to Mbaino. He was called the Cat because his back would never touch the earth. It was this man that Okonkwo threw in a fight which the old men agreed was one of the fiercest since the founder of their town engaged a spirit of the wild for seven days and seven nights. The drums beat and the flutes sang and the spectators held their breath. Amalinze was a wily craftsman, but Okonkwo was as slippery as a fish in water. Every nerve and every muscle stood out on their arms, on their backs and their thighs, and one almost heard them stretching to breaking point. In the end Okonkwo threw the Cat. That was many years ago, twenty years or more, and during this time Okonkwo's fame had grown like a bush-fire in the harmattan. He was tall and huge, and his bushy eyebrows and wide nose gave him a very severe look. He breathed heavily, and it was said that, when he slept, his wives and children in their houses could hear him breathe. When he walked, his heels hardly touched the ground and he seemed to walk on springs, as if he was going to pounce on somebody. And he did pounce on people quite often. He had a slight stammer and whenever he was angry and could not get his words out quickly enough, he would use his fists. He had no patience with unsuccessful men. He had had no patience with his father. Unoka, for that was his father's name, had died ten years ago. In his day he was lazy and improvident and was quite incapable of thinking about tomorrow. If any money came his way, and it seldom did, he immediately bought gourds of palm-wine, called round his neighbours and made merry. He always said that whenever he saw a dead man's mouth he saw the folly of not eating what one had in one's lifetime. Unoka was, of course, a debtor, and he owed every neighbour some money, from a few cowries to quite substantial amounts. He was tall but very thin and had a slight stoop. He wore a haggard and mournful look except when he was drinking or playing on his flute. He was very good on his flute, and his happiest moments were the two or three moons after the harvest when the village musicians brought down their instruments, hung above the fireplace. Unoka would play with them, his face beaming with blessedness and peace. Sometimes another village would ask Unoka's band and their dancing egwugwu to come and stay with them and teach them their tunes. They would go to such hosts for as long as three or four markets, making music and feasting. Unoka loved the good hire and the good fellowship, and he loved this season of the year, when the rains had stopped and the sun rose every morning with dazzling beauty. And it was not too hot either, because the cold and dry harmattan wind was blowing down from the north. Some years the harmattan was very severe and a dense haze hung on the atmosphere. Old men and children would then sit round log fires, warming their bodies. Unoka loved it all, and he loved the first kites that returned with the dry season, and the children who sang songs of welcome to them. He would remember his own childhood, how he had often wandered around looking for a kite sailing leisurely against the blue sky. As soon as he found one he would sing with his whole being, welcoming it back from its long, long journey, and asking it if it had brought home any lengths of cloth. That was years ago, when he was young. Unoka, the grown-up, was a failure. He was poor and his wife and children had barely enough to eat. People laughed at him because he was a loafer, and they swore never to lend him any more money because he never paid back. But Unoka was such a man that he always succeeded in borrowing more, and piling up his debts. One day a neighbour called Okoye came in to see him. He was reclining on a mud bed in his hut playing on the flute. He immediately rose and shook hands with Okoye, who then unrolled the goatskin which he carried under his arm, and sat down. Unoka went into an inner room and soon returned with a small wooden disc containing a kola nut, some alligator pepper and a lump of white chalk. "I have kola," he announced when he sat down, and passed the disc over to his guest. "Thank you. He who brings kola brings life. But I think you ought to break it," replied Okoye, passing back the disc. "No, it is for you, I think," and they argued like this for a few moments before Unoka accepted the honour of breaking the kola. Okoye, meanwhile, took the lump of chalk, drew some lines on the floor, and then painted his big toe. As he broke the kola, Unoka prayed to their ancestors for life and health, and for protection against their enemies. When they had eaten they talked about many things: about the heavy rains which were drowning the yams, about the next ancestral feast and about the impending war with the village of Mbaino. Unoka was never happy when it came to wars. He was in fact a coward and could not bear the sight of blood. And so he changed the subject and talked about music, and his face beamed. He could hear in his mind's ear the blood-stirring and intricate rhythms of the ekwe and the udu and the ogene, and he could hear his own flute weaving in and out of them, decorating them with a colourful and plaintive tune. The total effect was gay and brisk, but if one picked out the flute as it went up and down and then broke up into short snatches, one saw that there was sorrow and grief there. Okoye was also a musician. He played on the ogene. But he was not a failure like Unoka. He had a large barn full of yams and he had three wives. And now he was going to take the Idemili title, the third highest in the land. It was a very expensive ceremony and he was gathering all his resources together. That was in fact the reason why he had come to see Unoka. He cleared his throat and began: "Thank you for the kola. You may have heard of the title I intend to take shortly." Having spoken plainly so far, Okoye said the next half a dozen sentences in proverbs. Among the Ibo the art of conversation is regarded very highly, and proverbs are the palm-oil with which words are eaten. Okoye was a great talker and he spoke for a long time, skirting round the subject and then hitting it finally. In short, he was asking Unoka to return the two hundred cowries he had borrowed from him more than two years before. As soon as Unoka understood what his friend was driving at, he burst out laughing. He laughed loud and long and his voice rang out clear as the ogene, and tears stood in his eyes. His visitor was amazed, and sat speechless. At the end, Unoka was able to give an answer between fresh outbursts of mirth. "Look at that wall," he said, pointing at the far wall of his hut, which was rubbed with red earth so that it shone. "Look at those lines of chalk," and Okoye saw groups of short perpendicular lines drawn in chalk. There were five groups, and the smallest group had ten lines. Unoka had a sense of the dramatic and so he allowed a pause, in which he took a pinch of snuff and sneezed noisily, and then he continued: "Each group there represents a debt to someone, and each stroke is one hundred cowries. You see, I owe that man a thousand cowries. But he has not come to wake me up in the morning for it. I shall pay you, but not today. Our elders say that the sun will shine on those who stand before it shines on those who kneel under them. I shall pay my big debts first." And he took another pinch of snuff, as if that was paying the big debts first. Okoye rolled his goatskin and departed. When Unoka died he had taken no title at all and he was heavily in debt. Any wonder then that his son Okonkwo was ashamed of him? Fortunately, among these people a man was judged according to his worth and not according to the worth of his father. Okonkwo was clearly cut out for great things. He was still young but he had won fame as the greatest wrestler in the nine villages. He was a wealthy farmer and had two barns full of yams, and had just married his third wife. To crown it all he had taken two titles and had shown incredible prowess in two inter-tribal wars. And so although Okonkwo was still young, he was already one of the greatest men of his time. Age was respected among his people, but achievement was revered. As the elders said, if a child washed his hands he could eat with kings. Okonkwo had clearly washed his hands and so he ate with kings and elders. And that was how he came to look after the doomed lad who was sacrificed to the village of Umuofia by their neighbours to avoid war and bloodshed. The ill-fated lad was called Ikemefuna. CHAPTER TWO Okonkwo had just blown out the palm-oil lamp and stretched himself on his bamboo bed when he heard the ogene of the town crier piercing the still night air. Gome, gome, gome, gome, boomed the hollow metal. Then the crier gave his message, and at the end of it beat his instrument again. And this was the message. Every man of Umuofia was asked to gather at the market place tomorrow morning. Okonkwo wondered what was amiss, for he knew certainly that something was amiss. He had discerned a clear overtone of tragedy in the crier's voice, and even now he could still hear it as it grew dimmer and dimmer in the distance. The night was very quiet. It was always quiet except on moonlight nights. Darkness held a vague terror for these people, even the bravest among them. Children were warned not to whistle at night for fear of evil spirits. Dangerous animals became even more sinister and uncanny in the dark. A snake was never called by its name at night, because it would hear. It was called a string. And so on this particular night as the crier's voice was gradually swallowed up in the distance, silence returned to the world, a vibrant silence made more intense by the universal trill of a million million forest insects. On a moonlight night it would be different. The happy voices of children playing in open fields would then be heard. And perhaps those not so young would be playing in pairs in less open places, and old men and women would remember their youth. As the Ibo say: "When the moon is shining the cripple becomes hungry for a walk." But this particular night was dark and silent. And in all the nine villages of Umuofia a town crier with his ogene asked every man to be present tomorrow morning. Okonkwo on his bamboo bed tried to figure out the nature of the emergency - war with a neighbouring clan? That seemed the most likely reason, and he was not afraid of war. He was a man of action, a man of war. Unlike his father he could stand the look of blood. In Umuofia's latest war he was the first to bring home a human head. That was his fifth head and he was not an old man yet. On great occasions such as the funeral of a village celebrity he drank his palm-wine from his first human head. In the morning the market place was full. There must have been about ten thousand men there, all talking in low voices. At last Ogbuefi Ezeugo stood up in the midst of them and bellowed four times, "Umuofia kwenu," and on each occasion he faced a different direction and seemed to push the air with a clenched fist. And ten thousand men answered "Yaa!" each time. Then there was perfect silence. Ogbuefi Ezeugo was a powerful orator and was always chosen to speak on such occasions. He moved his hand over his white head and stroked his white beard. He then adjusted his cloth, which was passed under his right arm-pit and tied above his left shoulder. "Umuofia kwenu," he bellowed a fifth time, and the crowd yelled in answer. And then suddenly like one possessed he shot out his left hand and pointed in the direction of Mbaino, and said through gleaming white teeth firmly clenched: "Those sons of wild animals have dared to murder a daughter of Umuofia." He threw his head down and gnashed his teeth, and allowed a murmur of suppressed anger to sweep the crowd. When he began again, the anger on his face was gone, and in its place a sort of smile hovered, more terrible and more sinister than the anger. And in a clear unemotional voice he told Umuofia how their daughter had gone to market at Mbaino and had been killed. That woman, said Ezeugo, was the wife of Ogbuefi Udo, and he pointed to a man who sat near him with a bowed head. The crowd then shouted with anger and thirst for blood. Many others spoke, and at the end it was decided to follow the normal course of action. An ultimatum was immediately dispatched to Mbaino asking them to choose between war - on the one hand, and on the other the offer of a young man and a virgin as compensation. Umuofia was feared by all its neighbours. It was powerful in war and in magic, and its priests and medicine men were feared in all the surrounding country. Its most potent war-medicine was as old as the clan itself. Nobody knew how old. But on one point there was general agreementthe active principle in that medicine had been an old woman with one leg. In fact, the medicine itself was called agadi-nwayi, or old woman. It had its shrine in the centre of Umuofia, in a cleared spot. And if anybody was so foolhardy as to pass by the shrine after dusk he was sure to see the old woman hopping about. And so the neighbouring clans who naturally knew of these things feared Umuofia, and would not go to war against it without first trying a peaceful settlement. And in fairness to Umuofia it should be recorded that it never went to war unless its case was clear and just and was accepted as such by its Oracle - the Oracle of the Hills and the Caves. And there were indeed occasions when the Oracle had forbidden Umuofia to wage a war. If the clan had disobeyed the Oracle they would surely have been beaten, because their dreaded agadi-nwayi would never fight what the Ibo call a fight of blame. But the war that now threatened was a just war. Even the enemy clan knew that. And so when Okonkwo of Umuofia arrived at Mbaino as the proud and imperious emissary of war, he was treated with great honour and respect, and two days later he returned home with a lad of fifteen and a young virgin. The lad's name was Ikemefuna, whose sad story is still told in Umuofia unto this day. The elders, or ndichie, met to hear a report of Okonkwo's mission. At the end they decided, as everybody knew they would, that the girl should go to Ogbuefi Udo to replace his murdered wife. As for the boy, he belonged to the clan as a whole, and there was no hurry to decide his fate. Okonkwo was, therefore, asked on behalf of the clan to look after him in the interim. And so for three years Ikemefuna lived in Okonkwo's household. Okonkwo ruled his household with a heavy hand. His wives, especially the youngest, lived in perpetual fear of his fiery temper, and so did his little children. Perhaps down in his heart Okonkwo was not a cruel man. But his whole life was dominated by fear, the fear of failure and of weakness. It was deeper and more intimate than the fear of evil and capricious gods and of magic, the fear of the forest, and of the forces of nature, malevolent, red in tooth and claw. Okonkwo's fear was greater than these. It was not external but lay deep within himself. It was the fear of himself, lest he should be found to resemble his father. Even as a little boy he had resented his father's failure and weakness, and even now he still remembered how he had suffered when a playmate had told him that his father was agbala. That was how Okonkwo first came to know that agbala was not only another name for a woman, it could also mean a man who had taken no title. And so Okonkwo was ruled by one passion - to hate everything that his father Unoka had loved. One of those things was gentleness and another was idleness. During the planting season Okonkwo worked daily on his farms from cock-crow until the chickens went to roost. He was a very strong man and rarely felt fatigue. But his wives and young children were not as strong, and so they suffered. But they dared not complain openly. Okonkwo's first son, Nwoye, was then twelve years old but was already causing his father great anxiety for his incipient laziness. At any rate, that was how it looked to his father, and he sought to correct him by constant nagging and beating. And so Nwoye was developing into a sad-faced youth. Okonkwo's prosperity was visible in his household. He had a large compound enclosed by a thick wall of red earth. His own hut, or obi, stood immediately behind the only gate in the red walls. Each of his three wives had her own hut, which together formed a half moon behind the obi. The barn was built against one end of the red walls, and long stacks of yam stood out prosperously in it. At the opposite end of the compound was a shed for the goats, and each wife built a small attachment to her hut for the hens. Near the barn was a small house, the "medicine house" or shrine where Okonkwo kept the wooden symbols of his personal god and of his ancestral spirits. He worshipped them with sacrifices of kola nut, food and palm-wine, and offered prayers to them on behalf of himself, his three wives and eight children. So when the daughter of Umuofia was killed in Mbaino, Ikemefuna came into Okonkwo's household. When Okonkwo brought him home that day he called his most senior wife and handed him over to her. "He belongs to the clan," he told her. "So look after him." "Is he staying long with us?" she asked. "Do what you are told, woman," Okonkwo thundered, and stammered. "When did you become one of the ndichie of Umuofia?" And so Nwoye's mother took Ikemefuna to her hut and asked no more questions. As for the boy himself, he was terribly afraid. He could not understand what was happening to him or what he had done. How could he know that his father had taken a hand in killing a daughter of Umuofia? All he knew was that a few men had arrived at their house, conversing with his father in low tones, and at the end he had been taken out and handed over to a stranger. His mother had wept bitterly, but he had been too surprised to weep. And so the stranger had brought him, and a girl, a long, long way from home, through lonely forest paths. He did not know who the girl was, and he never saw her again. CHAPTER THREE Okonkwo did not have the start in life which many young men usually had. He did not inherit a barn from his father. There was no barn to inherit. The story was told in Umuofia, of how his father, Unoka, had gone to consult the Oracle of the Hills and the Caves to find out why he always had a miserable harvest. The Oracle was called Agbala, and people came from far and near to consult it. They came when misfortune dogged their steps or when they had a dispute with their neighbours. They came to discover what the future held for them or to consult the spirits of their departed fathers. The way into the shrine was a round hole at the side of a hill, just a little bigger than the round opening into a henhouse. Worshippers and those who came to seek knowledge from the god crawled on their belly through the hole and found themselves in a dark, endless space in the presence of Agbala. No one had ever beheld Agbala, except his priestess. But no one who had ever crawled into his awful shrine had come out without the fear of his power. His priestess stood by the sacred fire which she built in the heart of the cave and proclaimed the will of the god. The fire did not burn with a flame. The glowing logs only served to light up vaguely the dark figure of the priestess. Sometimes a man came to consult the spirit of his dead father or relative. It was said that when such a spirit appeared, the man saw it vaguely in the darkness, but never heard its voice. Some people even said that they had heard the spirits flying and flapping their wings against the roof of the cave. Many years ago when Okonkwo was still a boy his father, Unoka, had gone to consult Agbala. The priestess in those days was a woman called Chika. She was full of the power of her god, and she was greatly feared. Unoka stood before her and began his story. "Every year," he said sadly, "before I put any crop in the earth, I sacrifice a cock to Ani, the owner of all land. It is the law of our fathers. I also kill a cock at the shrine of Ifejioku, the god of yams. I clear the bush and set fire to it when it is dry. I sow the yams when the first rain has fallen, and stake them when the young tendrils appear. I weed"  "Hold your peace!" screamed the priestess, her voice terrible as it echoed through the dark void. "You have offended neither the gods nor your fathers. And when a man is at peace with his gods and his ancestors, his harvest will be good or bad according to the strength of his arm. You, Unoka, are known in all the clan for the weakness of your machete and your hoe. When your neighbours go out with their axe to cut down virgin forests, you sow your yams on exhausted farms that take no labour to clear. They cross seven rivers to make their farms,- you stay at home and offer sacrifices to a reluctant soil. Go home and work like a man." Unoka was an ill-fated man. He had a bad chi or personal god, and evil fortune followed him to the grave, or rather to his death, for he had no grave. He died of the swelling which was an abomination to the earth goddess. When a man was afflicted with swelling in the stomach and the limbs he was not allowed to die in the house. He was carried to the Evil Forest and left there to die. There was the story of a very stubborn man who staggered back to his house and had to be carried again to the forest and tied to a tree. The sickness was an abomination to the earth, and so the victim could not be buried in her bowels. He died and rotted away above the earth, and was not given the first or the second burial. Such was Unoka's fate. When they carried him away, he took with him his flute. With a father like Unoka, Okonkwo did not have the start in life which many young men had. He neither inherited a barn nor a title, nor even a young wife. But in spite of these disadvantages, he had begun even in his father's lifetime to lay the foundations of a prosperous future. It was slow and painful. But he threw himself into it like one possessed. And indeed he was possessed by the fear of his father's contemptible life and shameful death. There was a wealthy man in Okonkwo's village who had three huge barns, nine wives and thirty children. His name was Nwakibie and he had taken the highest but one title which a man could take in the clan. It was for this man that Okonkwo worked to earn his first seed yams. He took a pot of palm-wine and a cock to Nwakibie. Two elderly neighbours were sent for, and Nwakibie's two grown-up sons were also present in his obi. He presented a kola nut and an alligator pepper, which were passed round for all to see and then returned to him. He broke the nut saying: We shall all live. We pray for life, children, a good harvest and happiness. You will have what is good for you and I will have what is good for me. Let the kite perch and let the eagle perch too. If one says no to the other, let his wing break." After the kola nut had been eaten Okonkwo brought his palm-wine from the corner of the hut where it had been placed and stood it in the centre of the group. He addressed Nwakibie, calling him "Our father." "Nna ayi," he said. "I have brought you this little kola. As our people say, a man who pays respect to the great paves the way for his own greatness. I have come to pay you my respects and also to ask a favour. But let us drink the wine first." Everybody thanked Okonkwo and the neighbours brought out their drinking horns from the goatskin bags they carried. Nwakibie brought down his own horn, which was fastened to the rafters. The younger of his sons, who was also the youngest man in the group, moved to the centre, raised the pot on his left knee and began to pour out the wine. The first cup went to Okonkwo, who must taste his wine before anyone else. Then the group drank, beginning with the eldest man. When everyone had drunk two or three horns, Nwakibie sent for his wives. Some of them were not at home and only four came in. "Is Anasi not in?" he asked them. They said she was coming. Anasi was the first wife and the others could not drink before her, and so they stood waiting. Anasi was a middle-aged woman, tall and strongly built. There was authority in her bearing and she looked every inch the ruler of the womenfolk in a large and prosperous family. She wore the anklet of her husband's titles, which the first wife alone could wear. She walked up to her husband and accepted the horn from him. She then went down on one knee, drank a little and handed back the horn. She rose, called him by his name and went back to her hut. The other wives drank in the same way, in their proper order, and went away. The men then continued their drinking and talking. Ogbuefi Idigo was talking about the palm-wine tapper, Obiako, who suddenly gave up his trade. "There must be something behind it," he said, wiping the foam of wine from his moustache with the back of his left hand. "There must be a reason for it. A toad does not run in the daytime for nothing." "Some people say the Oracle warned him that he would fall off a palm tree and kill himself," said Akukalia. "Obiako has always been a strange one," said Nwakibie. "I have heard that many years ago, when his father had not been dead very long, he had gone to consult the Oracle. The Oracle said to him, 'Your dead father wants you to sacrifice a goat to him.' Do you know what he told the Oracle? He said, 'Ask my dead father if he ever had a fowl when he was alive.' Everybody laughed heartily except Okonkwo, who laughed uneasily because, as the saying goes, an old woman is always uneasy when dry bones are mentioned in a proverb. Okonkwo remembered his own father. At last the young man who was pouring out the wine held up half a horn of the thick, white dregs and said, "What we are eating is finished." "We have seen it," the others replied. "Who will drink the dregs?" he asked. "Whoever has a job in hand," said Idigo, looking at Nwakibie's elder son Igwelo with a malicious twinkle in his eye. Everybody agreed that Igwelo should drink the dregs. He accepted the half-full horn from his brother and drank it. As Idigo had said, Igwelo had a job in hand because he had married his first wife a month or two before. The thick dregs of palm-wine were supposed to be good for men who were going in to their wives. After the wine had been drunk Okonkwo laid his difficulties before Nwakibie. "I have come to you for help," he said. "Perhaps you can already guess what it is. I have cleared a farm but have no yams to sow. I know what it is to ask a man to trust another with his yams, especially these days when young men are afraid of hard work. I am not afraid of work. The lizard that jumped from the high iroko tree to the ground said he would praise himself if no one else did. I began to fend for myself at an age when most people still suck at their mothers' breasts. If you give me some yam seeds I shall not fail you." Nwakibie cleared his throat. "It pleases me to see a young man like you these days when our youth has gone so soft. Many young men have come to me to ask for yams but I have refused because I knew they would just dump them in the earth and leave them to be choked by weeds. When I say no to them they think I am hard hearted. But it is not so. Eneke the bird says that since men have learned to shoot without missing, he has learned to fly without perching. I have learned to be stingy with my yams. But I can trust you. I know it as I look at you. As our fathers said, you can tell a ripe corn by its look. I shall give you twice four hundred yams. Go ahead and prepare your farm." Okonkwo thanked him again and again and went home feeling happy. He knew that Nwakibie would not refuse him, but he had not expected he would be so generous. He had not hoped to get more than four hundred seeds. He would now have to make a bigger farm. He hoped to get another four hundred yams from one of his father's friends at Isiuzo. Share-cropping was a very slow way of building up a barn of one's own. After all the toil one only got a third of the harvest. But for a young man whose father had no yams, there was no other way. And what made it worse in Okonkwo's case was that he had to support his mother and two sisters from his meagre harvest. And supporting his mother also meant supporting his father. She could not be expected to cook and eat while her husband starved. And so at a very early age when he was striving desperately to build a barn through share-cropping Okonkwo was also fending for his father's house. It was like pouring grains of corn into a bag full of holes. His mother and sisters worked hard enough, but they grew womens crops, like coco-yams, beans and cassava. Yam, the king of crops, was a man's crop. The year that Okonkwo took eight hundred seed-yams from Nwakibie was the worst year in living memory. Nothing happened at its proper time,- it was either too early or too late. It seemed as if the world had gone mad. The first rains were late, and, when they came, lasted only a brief moment. The blazing sun returned, more fierce than it had ever been known, and scorched all the green that had appeared with the rains. The earth burned like hot coals and roasted all the yams that had been sown. Like all good farmers, Okonkwo had begun to sow with the first rains. He had sown four hundred seeds when the rains dried up and the heat returned. He watched the sky all day for signs of rain clouds and lay awake all night. In the morning he went back to his farm and saw the withering tendrils. He had tried to protect them from the smouldering earth by making rings of thick sisal leaves around them. But by the end of the day the sisal rings were burned dry and grey. He changed them every day, and prayed that the rain might fall in the night. But the drought continued for eight market weeks and the yams were killed. Some farmers had not planted their yams yet. They were the lazy easy-going ones who always put off clearing their farms as long as they could. This year they were the wise ones. They sympathised with their neighbours with much shaking of the head, but inwardly they were happy for what they took to be their own foresight. Okonkwo planted what was left of his seed-yams when the rains finally returned. He had one consolation. The yams he had sown before the drought were his own, the harvest of the previous year. He still had the eight hundred from Nwakibie and the four hundred from his father's friend. So he would make a fresh start. But the year had gone mad. Rain fell as it had never fallen before. For days and nights together it poured down in violent torrents, and washed away the yam heaps. Trees were uprooted and deep gorges appeared everywhere. Then the rain became less violent. But it went from day to day without a pause. The spell of sunshine which always came in the middle of the wet season did not appear. The yams put on luxuriant green leaves, but every farmer knew that without sunshine the tubers would not grow. That year the harvest was sad, like a funeral, and many farmers wept as they dug up the miserable and rotting yams. One man tied his cloth to a tree branch and hanged himself. Okonkwo remembered that tragic year with a cold shiver throughout the rest of his life. It always surprised him when he thought of it later that he did not sink under the load of despair. He knew that he was a fierce fighter, but that year-had been enough to break the heart of a lion. "Since I survived that year," he always said, "I shall survive anything." He put it down to his inflexible will. His father, Unoka, who was then an ailing man, had said to him during that terrible harvest month: "Do not despair. I know you will not despair. You have a manly and a proud heart. A proud heart can survive a general failure because such failure does not prick its pride. It is more difficult and more bitter when a man fails alone." Unoka was like that in his last days. His love of talk had grown with age and sickness. It tried Okonkwo's patience beyond words. CHAPTER FOUR "Looking at a king's mouth," said an old man, "one would think he never sucked at his mother's breast." He was talking about Okonkwo, who had risen so suddenly from great poverty and misfortune to be one of the lords of the clan. The old man bore no ill will towards Okonkwo. Indeed he respected him for his industry and success. But he was struck, as most people were, by Okonkwo's brusqueness in dealing with less successful men. Only a week ago a man had contradicted him at a kindred meeting which they held to discuss the next ancestral feast. Without looking at the man Okonkwo had said: "This meeting is for men." The man who had contradicted him had no titles. That was why he had called him a woman. Okonkwo knew how to kill a man's spirit. Everybody at the kindred meeting took sides with Osugo when Okonkwo called him a woman. The oldest man present said sternly that those whose palm-kernels were cracked for them by a benevolent spirit should not forget to be humble. Okonkwo said he was sorry for what he had said, and the meeting continued. But it was really not true that Okonkwo's palm-kernels had been cracked for him by a benevolent spirit. He had cracked them himself. Anyone who knew his grim struggle against poverty and misfortune could not say he had been lucky. If ever a man deserved his success, that man was Okonkwo. At an early age he had achieved fame as the greatest wrestler in all the land. That was not luck. At the most one could say that his chi or personal god was good. But the Ibo people have a proverb that when a man says yes his chi says yes also. Okonkwo said yes very strongly, so his chi agreed. And not only his chi but his clan too, because it judged a man by the work of his hands. That was why Okonkwo had been Chosen by the nine villages to carry a message of war to their enemies unless they agreed to give up a young man and a virgin to atone for the murder of Udo's wife. And such was the deep fear that their enemies had for Umuofia that they treated Okonkwo like a king and brought him a virgin who was given to Udo as wife, and the lad Ikemefuna. The elders of the clan had decided that Ikemefuna should be in Okonkwo's care for a while. But no one thought It would be as long as three years. They seemed to forget all about him as soon as they had taken the decision. At first Ikemefuna was very much afraid. Once or twice he tried to run away, but he did not know where to begin. He thought of his mother and his three-year-old sister and wept bitterly. Nwoye's mother was very kind to him and treated him as one of her own children. But all he said was: "When shall I go home?" When Okonkwo heard that he would not eat any food he came into the hut with a big stick in his hand and stood over him while he swallowed his yams, trembling. A few moments later he went behind the hut and began to vomit painfully. Nwoye's mother went to him and placed her hands on his chest and on his back. He was ill for three market weeks, and when he recovered he seemed to have overcome his great fear and sadness. He was by nature a very lively boy and he gradually became popular in Okonkwo's household, especially with the children. Okonkwo's son, Nwoye, who was two years younger, became quite inseparable from him because he seemed to know everything. He could fashion out flutes from bamboo stems and even from the elephant grass. He knew the names of all the birds and could set clever traps for the little bush rodents. And he knew which trees made the strongest bows. Even Okonkwo himself became very fond of the boy - inwardly of course. Okonkwo never showed any emotion openly, unless it be the emotion of anger. To show affection was a sign of weakness,-the only thing worth demonstrating was strength. He therefore treated Ikemefuna as he treated everybody else - with a heavy hand. But there was no doubt that he liked the boy. Sometimes when he went to big village meetings or communal ancestral feasts he allowed Ikemefuna to accompany him, like a son, carrying his stool and his goatskin bag. And, indeed, Ikemefuna called him father. Ikemefuna came to Umuofia at the end of the carefree season between harvest and planting. In fact he recovered from his illness only a few days before the Week of Peace began. And that was also the year Okonkwo broke the peace, and was punished, as was the custom, by Ezeani, the priest of the earth goddess. Okonkwo was provoked to justifiable anger by his youngest wife, who went to plait her hair at her friend's house and did not return early enough to cook the afternoon meal. Okonkwo did not know at first that she was not at home. After waiting in vain for her dish he went to her hut to see what she was doing. There was nobody in the hut and the fireplace was cold. "Where is Ojiugo?" he asked his second wife, who came out of her hut to draw water from a gigantic pot in the shade of a small tree in the middle of the compound. "She has gone to plait her hair." Okonkwo bit his lips as anger welled up within him. "Where are her children? Did she take them?" he asked with unusual coolness and restraint. "They are here," answered his first wife, Nwoye's mother. Okonkwo bent down and looked into her hut. Ojiugo's children were eating with the children of his first wife. "Did she ask you to feed them before she went?" "Yes," lied Nwoye's mother, trying to minimise Ojiugo's thoughtlessness. Okonkwo knew she was not speaking the truth. He walked back to his obi to await Ojiugo's return. And when she returned he beat her very heavily. In his anger he had forgotten that it was the Week of Peace. His first two wives ran out in great alarm pleading with him that it was the sacred week. But Okonkwo was not the man to stop beating somebody half-way through, not even for fear of a goddess. Okonkwo's neighbours heard his wife crying and sent their voices over the compound walls to ask what was the matter. Some of them came over to see for themselves. It was unheard of to beat somebody during the sacred week. Before it was dusk Ezeani, who was the priest of the earth goddess, Ani, called on Okonkwo in his obi. Okonkwo brought out kola nut and placed it before the priest, "Take away your kola nut. I shall not eat in the house of a man who has no respect for our gods and ancestors." Okonkwo tried to explain to him what his wife had done, but Ezeani seemed to pay no attention. He held a short staff in his hand which he brought down on the floor to emphasise his points. "Listen to me," he said when Okonkwo had spoken. "You are not a stranger in Umuofia. You know as well as I do that our forefathers ordained that before we plant any crops in the earth we should observe a week in which a man does not say a harsh word to his neighbour. We live in peace with our fellows to honour our great goddess of the earth without whose blessing our crops will not grow. You have committed a great evil." He brought down his staff heavily on the floor. "Your wife was at fault, but even if you came into your obi and found her lover on top of her, you would still have committed a great evil to beat her." His staff came down again. "The evil you have done can ruin the whole clan. The earth goddess whom you have insulted may refuse to give us her increase, and we shall all perish." His tone now changed from anger to command. "You will bring to the shrine of Ani tomorrow one she-goat, one hen, a length of cloth and a hundred cowries." He rose and left the hut. Okonkwo did as the priest said. He also took with him a pot of palm-wine. Inwardly, he was repentant. But he was not the man to go about telling his neighbours that he was in error. And so people said he had no respect for the gods of the clan. His enemies said his good fortune had gone to his head. They called him the little bird nza who so far forgot himself after a heavy meal that he challenged his chi. No work was done during the Week of Peace. People called on their neighbours and drank palm-wine. This year they talked of nothing else but the nso-ani which Okonkwo had committed. It was the first time for many years that a man had broken the sacred peace. Even the oldest men could only remember one or two other occasions somewhere in the dim past. Ogbuefi Ezeudu, who was the oldest man in the village, was telling two other men who came to visit him that the punishment for breaking the Peace of Ani had become very mild in their clan. "It has not always been so," he said. "My father told me that he had been told that in the past a man who broke the peace was dragged on the ground through the village until he died. But after a while this custom was stopped because it spoiled the peace which it was meant to preserve." "Somebody told me yesterday," said one of the younger men, "that in some clans it is an abomination for a man to die during the Week of Peace." "It is indeed true," said Ogbuefi Ezeudu. "They have that custom in Obodoani. If a man dies at this time he is not buried but cast into the Evil Forest. It is a bad custom which these people observe because they lack understanding. They throw away large numbers of men and women without burial. And what is the result? Their clan is full of the evil spirits of these unburied dead, hungry to do harm to the living." After the Week of Peace every man and his family began to clear the bush to make new farms. The cut bush was left to dry and fire was then set to it. As the smoke rose into the sky kites appeared from different directions and hovered over the burning field in silent valediction. The rainy season was approaching when they would go away until the dry season returned. Okonkwo spent the next few days preparing his seed-yams. He looked at each yam carefully to see whether it was good for sowing. Sometimes he decided that a yam was too big to be sown as one seed and he split it deftly along its length with his sharp knife. His eldest son, Nwoye, and Ikemefuna helped him by fetching the yams in long baskets from the barn and in counting the prepared seeds in groups of four hundred. Sometimes Okonkwo gave them a few yams each to prepare. But he always found fault with their effort, and he said so with much threatening. "Do you think you are cutting up yams for cooking?" he asked Nwoye. "If you split another yam of this size, I shall break your jaw. You think you are still a child. I began to own a farm at your age. And you," he said to Ikemefuna, "do you not grow yams where you come from?" Inwardly Okonkwo knew that the boys were still too young to understand fully the difficult art of preparing seed-yams. But he thought that one could not begin too early. Yam stood for manliness, and he who could feed his family on yams from one harvest to another was a very great man indeed. Okonkwo wanted his son to be a great farmer and a great man. He would stamp out the disquieting signs of laziness which he thought he already saw in him. "I will not have a son who cannot hold up his head in the gathering of the clan. I would sooner strangle him with my own hands. And if you stand staring at me like that," he swore, "Amadiora will break your head for you!" Some days later, when the land had been moistened by two or three heavy rains, Okonkwo and his family went to the farm with baskets of seed-yams, their hoes and machetes, and the planting began. They made single mounds of earth in straight lines all over the field and sowed the yams in them. Yam, the king of crops, was a very exacting king. For three or four moons it demanded hard work and constant attention from cockcrow till the chickens went back to roost. The young tendrils were protected from earth-heat with rings of sisal leaves. As the rains became heavier the women planted maize, melons and beans between the yam mounds. The yams were then staked, first with little sticks and later with tall and big tree branches. The women weeded the farm three times at definite periods in the life of the yams, neither early nor late. And now the rains had really come, so heavy and persistent that even the village rain-maker no longer claimed to be able to intervene. He could not stop the rain now, just as he would not attempt to start it in the heart of the dry season, without serious danger to his own health. The personal dynamism required to counter the forces of these extremes of weather would be far too great for the human frame. And so nature was not interfered with in the middle of the rainy season. Sometimes it poured down in such thick sheets of water that earth and sky seemed merged in one grey wetness. It was then uncertain whether the low rumbling of Amadiora's thunder came from above or below. At such times, in each of the countless thatched huts of Umuofia, children sat around their mother's cooking fire telling stories, or with their father in his obi warming themselves from a log fire, roasting and eating maize. It was a brief resting period between the exacting and arduous planting season and the equally exacting but light-hearted month of harvests. Ikemefuna had begun to feel like a member of Okonkwo's family. He still thought about his mother and his three-year-old sister, and he had moments of sadness and depression But he and Nwoye had become so deeply attached to each other that such moments became less frequent and less poignant. Ikemefuna had an endless stock of folk tales. Even those which Nwoye knew already were told with a new freshness and the local flavour of a different clan. Nwoye remembered this period very vividly till the end of his life. He even remembered how he had laughed when Ikemefuna told him that the proper name for a corn cob with only a few scattered grains was eze-agadi-nwayi, or the teeth of an old woman. Nwoye's mind had gone immediately to Nwayieke, who lived near the udala tree. She had about three teeth and was always smoking her pipe. Gradually the rains became lighter and less frequent, and earth and sky once again became separate. The rain fell in thin, slanting showers through sunshine and quiet breeze. Children no longer stayed indoors but ran about singing: "The rain is falling, the sun is shining, Alone Nnadi is cooking and eating." Nwoye always wondered who Nnadi was and why he should live all by himself, cooking and eating. In the end he decided that Nnadi must live in that land of Ikemefuna's favourite story where the ant holds his court in splendour and the sands dance forever. CHAPTER FIVE The Feast of the New Yam was approaching and Umuofia was in a festival mood. It was an occasion for giving thanks to Ani, the earth goddess and the source of all fertility. Ani played a greater part in the life of the people than any other deity. She was the ultimate judge of morality and conduct. And what was more, she was in close communion with the departed fathers of the clan whose bodies had been committed to earth. The Feast of the New Yam was held every year before the harvest began, to honour the earth goddess and the ancestral spirits of the clan. New yams could not be eaten until some had first been offered to these powers. Men and women, young and old, looked forward to the New Yam Festival because it began the season of plentythe new year. On the last night before the festival, yams of the old year were all disposed of by those who still had them. The new year must begin with tasty, fresh yams and not the shrivelled and fibrous crop of the previous year. All cooking pots, calabashes and wooden bowls were thoroughly washed, especially the wooden mortar in which yam was pounded. Yam foo-foo and vegetable soup was the chief food in the celebration. So much of it was cooked that, no matter how heavily the family ate or how many friends and relatives they invited from neighbouring villages, there was always a large quantity of food left over at the end of the day. The story was always told of a wealthy man who set before his guests a mound of foo-foo so high that those who sat on one side could not see what was happening on the other, and it was not until late in the evening that one of them saw for the first time his in-law who had arrived during the course of the meal and had fallen to on the opposite side. It was only then that they exchanged greetings and shook hands over what was left of the food. The New Yam Festival was thus an occasion for joy throughout Umuofia. And every man whose arm was strong, as the Ibo people say, was expected to invite large numbers of guests from far and wide. Okonkwo always asked his wives' relations, and since he now had three wives his guests would make a fairly big crowd. But somehow Okonkwo could never become as enthusiastic over feasts as most people. He was a good eater and he could drink one or two fairly big gourds of palm- wine. But he was always uncomfortable sitting around for days waiting for a feast or getting over it. He would be very much happier working on his farm. The festival was now only three days away. Okonkwo's wives had scrubbed the walls and the huts with red earth until they reflected light. They had then drawn patterns on them in white, yellow and dark green. They then set about painting themselves with cam wood and drawing beautiful black patterns on their stomachs and on their backs. The children were also decorated, especially their hair, which was shaved in beautiful patterns. The three women talked excitedly about the relations who had been invited, and the children revelled in the thought of being spoiled by these visitors from the motherland. Ikemefuna was equally excited. The New Yam Festival seemed to him to be a much bigger event here than in his own village, a place which was already becoming remote and vague in his imagination. And then the storm burst. Okonkwo, who had been walking about aimlessly in his compound in suppressed anger, suddenly found an outlet. "Who killed this banana tree?" he asked. A hush fell on the compound immediately. "Who killed this tree? Or are you all deaf and dumb?" As a matter of fact the tree was very much alive. Okonkwo's second wife had merely cut a few leaves off it to wrap some food, and she said so. Without further argument Okonkwo gave her a sound beating and left her and her only daughter weeping. Neither of the other wives dared to interfere beyond an occasional and tentative, "It is enough, Okonkwo," pleaded from a reasonable distance. His anger thus satisfied, Okonkwo decided to go out hunting. He had an old rusty gun made by a clever blacksmith who had come to live in Umuofia long ago. But although Okonkwo was a great man whose prowess was universally acknowledged, he was not a hunter. In fact he had not killed a rat with his gun. And so when he called Ikemefuna to fetch his gun, the wife who had just been beaten murmured something about guns that never shot. Unfortunately for her Okonkwo heard it and ran madly into his room for the loaded gun, ran out again and aimed at her as she clambered over the dwarf wall of the barn. He pressed the trigger and there was a loud report accompanied by the wail of his wives and children. He threw down the gun and jumped into the barn and there lay the woman, very much shaken and frightened but quite unhurt. He heaved a heavy sigh and went away with the gun. In spite of this incident the New Yam Festival was celebrated with great joy in Okonkwo's household. Early that morning as he offered a sacrifice of new yam and palm oil to his ancestors he asked them to protect him, his children and their mothers in the new year. As the day wore on his in-laws arrived from three surrounding villages, and each party brought with them a huge pot of palm-wine. And there was eating and drinking till night, when Okonkwo's in-laws began to leave for their homes The second day of the new year was the day of the great wrestling match between Okonkwo's village and their neighbours. It was difficult to say which the people enjoyed more, the feasting and fellowship of the first day or the wrestling Contest of the second. But there was one woman who had no doubt whatever in her mind. She was Okonkwo's second wife Ekwefi, whom he nearly shot. There was no festival in all the seasons of the year which gave her as much pleasure as the wrestling match. Many years ago when she was the village beauty Okonkwo had won her heart by throwing the Cat in the greatest contest within living memory. She did not marry him then because he was too poor to pay her bride-price. But a few years later she ran away from her husband and came to live with Okonkwo. All this happened many years ago. Now Ekwefi was a woman of forty-five who had suffered a great deal in her time. But her love of wrestling contests was still as strong as it was thirty years ago. It was not yet noon on the second day of the New Yam Festival. Ekwefi and her only daughter, Ezinma, sat near the fireplace waiting for the water in the pot to boil. The fowl Ekwefi had just killed was in the wooden mortar. The water began to boil, and in one deft movement she lifted the pot from the fire and poured the boiling water over the fowl. She put back the empty pot on the circular pad in the corner, and looked at her palms, which were black with soot. Ezinma was always surprised that her mother could lift a pot from the fire with her bare hands. "Ekwefi," she said, "is it true that when people are grown up, fire does not burn them?" Ezinma, unlike most children, called her mother by her name. "Yes," replied Ekwefi, too busy to argue. Her daughter was only ten years old but she was wiser than her years. "But Nwoye's mother dropped her pot of hot soup the other day and it broke on the floor." Ekwefi turned the hen over in the mortar and began to pluck the feathers. "Ekwefi," said Ezinma, who had joined in plucking the feathers, "my eyelid is twitching." "It means you are going to cry," said her mother. "No," Ezinma said, "it is this eyelid, the top one." "That means you will see something." "What will I see?" she asked. "How can I know?" Ekwefi wanted her to work it out herself. "Oho," said Ezinma at last. "I know what it isthe wrestling match." At last the hen was plucked clean. Ekwefi tried to pull out the horny beak but it was too hard. She turned round on her low stool and put the beak in the fire for a few moments. She pulled again and it came off. "Ekwefi!" a voice called from one of the other huts. It was Nwoye's mother, Okonkwo's first wife. "Is that me?" Ekwefi called back. That was the way people answered calls from outside. They never answered yes for fear it might be an evil spirit calling. "Will you give Ezinma some fire to bring to me?" Her own children and Ikemefuna had gone to the stream. Ekwefi put a few live coals into a piece of broken pot and Ezinma carried it across the clean swept compound to Nwoye's mother. "Thank you, Nma," she said. She was peeling new yams, and in a basket beside her were green vegetables and beans. "Let me make the fire for you," Ezinma offered. "Thank you, Ezigbo," she said. She often called her Ezigbo, which means "the good one." Ezinma went outside and brought some sticks from a huge bundle of firewood. She broke them into little pieces across the sole of her foot and began to build a fire, blowing it with her breath. "You will blow your eyes out," said Nwoye's mother, looking up from the yams she was peeling. "Use the fan." She stood up and pulled out the fan which was fastened into one of the rafters. As soon as she got up, the troublesome nanny goat, which had been dutifully eating yam peelings, dug her teeth into the real thing, scooped out two mouthfuls and fled from the hut to chew the cud in the goats' shed. Nwoye's mother swore at her and settled down again to her peeling. Ezinma's fire was now sending up thick clouds of smoke. She went on fanning it until it burst into flames. Nwoye's mother thanked her and she went back to her mother's hut. Just then the distant beating of drums began to reach them. It came from the direction of the ilo, the village playground. Every village had its own ilo which was as old as the village itself and where all the great ceremonies and dances took place. The drums beat the unmistakable wrestling dance - quick, light and gay, and it came floating on the wind. Okonkwo cleared his throat and moved his feet to the beat of the drums. It filled him with fire as it had always done from his youth. He trembled with the desire to conquer and subdue. It was like the desire for woman. "We shall be late for the wrestling," said Ezinma to her mother. "They will not begin until the sun goes down." "But they are beating the drums." "Yes. The drums begin at noon but the wrestling waits until the sun begins to sink. Go and see if your father has brought out yams for the afternoon." "He has. Nwoye's mother is already cooking." "Go and bring our own, then. We must cook quickly or we shall be late for the wrestling." Ezinma ran in the direction of the barn and brought back two yams from the dwarf wall. Ekwefi peeled the yams quickly. The troublesome nanny-goat sniffed about, eating the peelings. She cut the yams into small pieces and began to prepare a pottage, using some of the chicken. At that moment they heard someone crying just outside their compound. It was very much like Obiageli, Nwoye's sister. "Is that not Obiageli weeping?" Ekwefi called across the yard to Nwoye's mother. "Yes," she replied. "She must have broken her waterpot." The weeping was now quite close and soon the children filed in, carrying on their heads various sizes of pots suitable to their years. Ikemefuna came first with the biggest pot, closely followed by Nwoye and his two younger brothers. Obiageli brought up the rear, her face streaming with tears. In her hand was the cloth pad on which the pot should have rested on her head. "What happened?" her mother asked, and Obiageli told her mournful story. Her mother consoled her and promised to buy her another pot. Nwoye's younger brothers were about to tell their mother the true story of the accident when Ikemefuna looked at them sternly and they held their peace. The fact was that Obiageli had been making inyanga with her pot. She had balanced it on her head, folded her arms in front of her and began to sway her waist like a grown-up young lady. When the pot fell down and broke she burst out laughing. She only began to weep when they got near the iroko tree outside their compound. The drums were still beating, persistent and unchanging. Their sound was no longer a separate thing from the living village. It was like the pulsation of its heart. It throbbed in the air, in the sunshine, and even in the trees, and filled the village with excitement. Ekwefi ladled her husband's share of the pottage into a bowl and covered it. Ezinma took it to him in his obi. Okonkwo was sitting on a goatskin already eating his first wife's meal. Obiageli, who had brought it from her mother's hut, sat on the floor waiting for him to finish. Ezinma placed her mother's dish before him and sat with Obiageli. "Sit like a woman!" Okonkwo shouted at her. Ezinma brought her two legs together and stretched them in front of her. "Father, will you go to see the wrestling?" Ezinma asked after a suitable interval. "Yes," he answered. "Will you go?" "Yes." And after a pause she said: "Can I bring your chair for you?" "No, that is a boy's job." Okonkwo was specially fond of Ezinma. She looked very much like her mother, who was once the village beauty. But his fondness only showed on very rare occasions. "Obiageli broke her pot today," Ezinma said. "Yes, she has told me about it," Okonkwo said between mouthfuls. "Father," said Obiageli, "people should not talk when they are eating or pepper may go down the wrong way." "That is very true. Do you hear that, Ezinma? You are older than Obiageli but she has more sense." He uncovered his second wife's dish and began to eat from it. Obiageli took the first dish and returned to her mother's hut. And then Nkechi came in, bringing the third dish. Nkechi was the daughter of Okonkwo's third wife. In the distance the drums continued to beat. CHAPTER Six The whole village turned out on the ilo, men, women and children. They stood round in a huge circle leaving the centre of the playground free. The elders and grandees of the village sat on their own stools brought there by their young sons or slaves. Okonkwo was among them. All others stood except those who came early enough to secure places on the few stands which had been built by placing smooth logs on forked pillars. The wrestlers were not there yet and the drummers held the field. They too sat just in front of the huge circle of spectators, facing the elders. Behind them was the big and ancient silk-cotton tree which was sacred. Spirits of good children lived in that tree waiting to be born. On ordinary days young women who desired children came to sit under its shade. There were seven drums and they were arranged according to their sizes in a long wooden basket. Three men beat them with sticks, working feverishly from one drum to another. They were possessed by the spirit of the drums. The young men who kept order on these occasions dashed about, consulting among themselves and with the leaders of the two wrestling teams, who were still outside the circle, behind the crowd. Once in a while two young men carrying palm fronds ran round the circle and kept the crowd back by beating the ground in front of them or, if they were stubborn, their legs and feet. At last the two teams danced into the circle and the crowd roared and clapped. The drums rose to a frenzy. The people surged forward. The young men who kept order flew around, waving their palm fronds. Old men nodded to the beat of the drums and remembered the days when they wrestled to its intoxicating rhythm. The contest began with boys of fifteen or sixteen. There were only three such boys in each team. They were not the real wrestlers,-they merely set the scene. Within a short time the first two bouts were over. But the third created a big sensation even among the elders who did not usually show their excitement so openly. It was as quick as the other two, perhaps even quicker. But very few people had ever seen that kind of wrestling before. As soon as the two boys closed in, one of them did something which no one could describe because it had been as quick as a flash. And the other boy was flat on his back. The crowd roared and clapped and for a while drowned the frenzied drums. Okonkwo sprang to his feet and quickly sat down again. Three young men from the victorious boy's team ran forward, carried him shoulder high and danced through the cheering crowd. Everybody soon knew who the boy was. His name was Maduka, the son of Obierika. The drummers stopped for a brief rest before the real matches. Their bodies shone with sweat, and they took up fans and began to fan themselves. They also drank water from small pots and ate kola nuts. They became ordinary human beings again, talking and laughing among themselves and with others who stood near them. The air, which had been stretched taut with excitement, relaxed again. It was as if water had been poured on the tightened skin of a drum. Many people looked around, perhaps for the first time, and saw those who stood or sat next to them. "I did not know it was you," Ekwefi said to the woman who had stood shoulder to shoulder with her since the beginning of the matches. "I do not blame you," said the woman. "I have never seen such a large crowd of people. Is it true that Okonkwo nearly killed you with his gun?" "It is true indeed, my dear friend. I cannot yet find a mouth with which to tell the story." "Your chi is very much awake, my friend. And how is my daughter, Ezinma?" "She has been very well for some time now. Perhaps she has come to stay." "I think she has. How old is she now?" "She is about ten years old." "I think she will stay. They usually stay if they do not die before the age of six." "I pray she stays," said Ekwefi with a heavy sigh. The woman with whom she talked was called Chielo. She was the priestess of Agbala, the Oracle of the Hills and the Caves. In ordinary life Chielo was a widow with two children. She was very friendly with Ekwefi and they shared a common shed in the market. She was particularly fond of Ekwefi's only daughter, Ezinma, whom she called "my daughter." Quite often she bought beancakes and gave Ekwefi some to take home to Ezinma. Anyone seeing Chielo in ordinary life would hardly believe she was the same person who prophesied when the spirit of Agbala was upon her. The drummers took up their sticks and the air shivered and grew tense like a tightened bow. The two teams were ranged facing each other across the clear space. A young man from one team danced across the centre to the other side and pointed at whomever he wanted to fight. They danced back to the centre together and then closed in. There were twelve men on each side and the challenge went from one side to the other. Two judges walked around the wrestlers and when they thought they were equally matched, stopped them. Five matches ended in this way. But the really exciting moments were when a man was thrown. The huge voice of the crowd then rose to the sky and in every direction. It was even heard in the surrounding villages. The last match was between the leaders of the teams. They were among the best wrestlers in all the nine villages. The crowd wondered who would throw the other this year. Some said Okafo was the better man, others said he was not the equal of Ikezue. Last year neither of them had thrown the other even though the judges had allowed the contest to go on longer than was the custom. They had the same style and one saw the other's plans beforehand. It might happen again this year. Dusk was already approaching when their contest began. The drums went mad and the crowds also. They surged forward as the two young men danced into the circle. The palm fronds were helpless in keeping them back. Ikezue held out his right hand. Okafo seized it, and they closed in. It was a fierce contest. Ikezue strove to dig in his right heel behind Okafo so as to pitch him backwards in the clever ege style. But the one knew what the other was thinking. The crowd had surrounded and swallowed up the drummers, whose frantic rhythm was no longer a mere disembodied sound but the very heartbeat of the people. The wrestlers were now almost still in each other's grip. The muscles on their arms and their thighs and on their backs stood out and twitched. It looked like an equal match. The two judges were already moving forward to separate them when Ikezue, now desperate, went down quickly on one knee in an attempt to fling his man backwards over his head. It was a sad miscalculation. Quick as the lightning of Amadiora, Okafo raised his right leg and swung it over his rival's head. The crowd burst into a thunderous roar. Okafo was swept off his feet by his supporters and carried home shoulder high. They sang his praise and the young women clapped their hands: "Who will wrestle for our village? Okafo will wrestle for our village. Has he thrown a hundred men? He has thrown four hundred men. Has he thrown a hundred Cats? He has thrown four hundred Cats. Then send him word to fight for us." CHAPTER SEVEN For three years Ikemefuna lived in Okonkwo's household and the elders of Umuofia seemed to have forgotten about him. He grew rapidly like a yam tendril in the rainy season, and was full of the sap of life. He had become wholly absorbed into his new family. He was like an elder brother to Nwoye, and from the very first seemed to have kindled a new fire in the younger boy. He made him feel grown-up, and they no longer spent the evenings in his mother's hut while she cooked, but now sat with Okonkwo in his obi, or watched him as he tapped his palm tree for the evening wine. Nothing pleased Nwoye now more than to be sent for by his mother or another of his father's wives to do one of those difficult and masculine tasks in the home, like splitting wood, or pounding food. On receiving such a message through a younger brother or sister, Nwoye would feign annoyance and grumble aloud about women and their troubles. Okonkwo was inwardly pleased at his son's development, and he knew it was due to Ikemefuna. He wanted Nwoye to grow into a tough young man capable of ruling his father's household when he was dead and gone to join the ancestors. He wanted him to be a prosperous man, having enough in his barn to feed the ancestors with regular sacrifices. And so he was always happy when he heard him grumbling about women. That showed that in time he would be able to control his women-folk. No matter how prosperous a man was, if he was unable to rule his women and his children (and especially his women) he was not really a man. He was like the man in the song who had ten and one wives and not enough soup for his foo-foo. So Okonkwo encouraged the boys to sit with him in his obi, and he told them stories of the landmasculine stories of violence and bloodshed. Nwoye knew that it was right to be masculine and to be violent, but somehow he still preferred the stories that his mother used to tell, and which she no doubt still told to her younger childrenstories of the tortoise and his wily ways, and of the bird eneke-nti-oba who challenged the whole world to a wrestling contest and was finally thrown by the cat. He remembered the story she often told of the quarrel between Earth and Sky long ago, and how Sky withheld rain for seven years, until crops withered and the dead could not be buried because the hoes broke on the stony Earth. At last Vulture was sent to plead with Sky, and to soften his heart with a song of the suffering of the sons of men. Whenever Nwoye's mother sang this song he felt carried away to the distant scene in the sky where Vulture, Earth's emissary, sang for mercy. At last Sky was moved to pity, and he gave to Vulture rain wrapped in leaves of coco-yam. But as he flew home his long talon pierced the leaves and the rain fell as it had never fallen before. And so heavily did it rain on Vulture that he did not return to deliver his message but flew to a distant land, from where he had espied a fire. And when he got there he found it was a man making a sacrifice. He warmed himself in the fire and ate the entrails. That was the kind of story that Nwoye loved. But he now knew that they were for foolish women and children, and he knew that his father wanted him to be a man. And so he feigned that he no longer cared for women's stories. And when he did this he saw that his father was pleased, and no longer rebuked him or beat him. So Nwoye and Ikemefuna would listen to Okonkwo's stories about tribal wars, or how, years ago, he had stalked his victim, overpowered him and obtained his first human head. And as he told them of the past they sat in darkness or the dim glow of logs, waiting for the women to finish their cooking. When they finished, each brought her bowl of foo-foo and bowl of soup to her husband. An oil lamp was lit and Okonkwo tasted from each bowl, and then passed two shares to Nwoye and Ikemefuna. In this way the moons and the seasons passed. And then the locusts came. It had not happened for many a long year. The elders said locusts came once in a generation, reappeared every year for seven years and then disappeared for another lifetime. They went back to their caves in a distant land, where they were guarded by a race of stunted men. And then after another lifetime these men opened the caves again and the locusts came to Umuofia. They came in the cold harmattan season after the harvests had been gathered, and ate up all the wild grass in the fields. Okonkwo and the two boys were working on the red outer walls of the compound. This was one of the lighter tasks of the after-harvest season. A new cover of thick palm branches and palm leaves was set on the walls to protect them from the next rainy season. Okonkwo worked on the outside of the wall and the boys worked from within. There were little holes from one side to the other in the upper levels of the wall, and through these Okonkwo passed the rope, or tie-tie, to the boys and they passed it round the wooden stays and then back to him,- and in this way the cover was strengthened on the wall. The women had gone to the bush to collect firewood, and the little children to visit their playmates in the neighbouring compounds. The harmattan was in the air and seemed to distill a hazy feeling of sleep on the world. Okonkwo and the boys worked in complete silence, which was only broken when a new palm frond was lifted on to the wall or when a busy hen moved dry leaves about in her ceaseless search for food. And then quite suddenly a shadow fell on the world, and the sun seemed hidden behind a thick cloud. Okonkwo looked up from his work and wondered if it was going to rain at such an unlikely time of the year. But almost immediately a shout of joy broke out in all directions, and Umuofia, which had dozed in the noon-day haze, broke into life and activity. "Locusts are descending," was joyfully chanted everywhere, and men, women and children left their work or their play and ran into the open to see the unfamiliar sight. The locusts had not come for many, many years, and only the old people had seen them before. At first, a fairly small swarm came. They were the harbingers sent to survey the land. And then appeared on the horizon a slowly-moving mass like a boundless sheet of black cloud drifting towards Umuofia. Soon it covered half the sky, and the solid mass was now broken by tiny eyes of light like shining star dust. It was a tremendous sight, full of power and beauty. Everyone was now about, talking excitedly and praying that the locusts should camp in Umuofia for the night. For although locusts had not visited Umuofia for many years, everybody knew by instinct that they were very good to eat. And at last the locusts did descend. They settled on every tree and on every blade of grass, they settled on the roofs and covered the bare ground. Mighty tree branches broke away under them, and the whole country became the brown-earth colour of the vast, hungry swarm. Many people went out with baskets trying to catch them, but the elders counselled patience till nightfall. And they were right. The locusts settled in the bushes for the night and their wings became wet with dew. Then all Umuofia turned out in spite of the cold harmattan, and everyone filled his bags and pots with locusts. The next morning they were roasted in clay pots and then spread in the sun until they became dry and brittle. And for many days this rare food was eaten with solid palm-oil. Okonkwo sat in his obi crunching happily with Ikemefuna and Nwoye, and drinking palm-wine copiously, when Ogbuefi Ezeudu came in. Ezeudu was the oldest man in this quarter of Umuofia. He had been a great and fearless warrior in his time, and was now accorded great respect in all the clan. He refused to join in the meal, and asked Okonkwo to have a word with him outside. And so they walked out together, the old man supporting himself with his stick. When they were out of earshot, he said to Okonkwo: "That boy calls you father. Do not bear a hand in his death." Okonkwo was surprised, and was about to say something when the old man continued: "Yes, Umuofia has decided to kill him. The Oracle of the Hills and the Caves has pronounced it. They will take him outside Umuofia as is the custom, and kill him there. But I want you to have nothing to do with it. He calls you his father." The next day a group of elders from all the nine villages of Umuofia came to Okonkwo's house early in the morning, and before they began to speak in low tones Nwoye and Ikemefuna were sent out. They did not stay very long, but when they went away Okonkwo sat still for a very long time supporting his chin in his palms. Later in the day he called Ikemefuna and told him that he was to be taken home the next day. Nwoye overheard it and burst into tears, whereupon his father beat him heavily. As for Ikemefuna, he was at a loss. His own home had gradually become very faint and distant. He still missed his mother and his sister and would be very glad to see them. But somehow he knew he was not going to see them. He remembered once when men had talked in low tones with his father, and it seemed now as if it was happening all over again. Later, Nwoye went to his mother's hut and told her that Ikemefuna was going home. She immediately dropped her pestle with which she was grinding pepper, folded her arms across her breast and sighed, "Poor child." The next day, the men returned with a pot of wine. They were all fully dressed as if they were going to a big clan meeting or to pay a visit to a neighbouring village. They passed their cloths under the right arm-pit, and hung their goatskin bags and sheathed machetes over their left shoulders. Okonkwo got ready quickly and the party set out with Ikemefuna carrying the pot of wine. A deathly silence descended on Okonkwo's compound. Even the very little children seemed to know. Throughout that day Nwoye sat in his mother's hut and tears stood in his eyes. At the beginning of their journey the men of Umuofia talked and laughed about the locusts, about their women, and about some effeminate men who had refused to come with them. But as they drew near to the outskirts of Umuofia silence fell upon them too. The sun rose slowly to the centre of the sky, and the dry, sandy footway began to throw up the heat that lay buried in it. Some birds chirruped in the forests around. The men trod dry leaves on the sand. All else was silent. Then from the distance came the faint beating of the ekwe. It rose and faded with the winda peaceful dance from a distant clan. "It is an ozo dance," the men said among themselves. But no one was sure where it was coming from. Some said Ezimili, others Abame or Aninta. They argued for a short while and fell into silence again, and the elusive dance rose and fell with the wind. Somewhere a man was taking one of the titles of his clan, with music and dancing and a great feast. The footway had now become a narrow line in the heart of the forest. The short trees and sparse undergrowth which surrounded the men's village began to give way to giant trees and climbers which perhaps had stood from the beginning of things, untouched by the axe and the bush-fire. The sun breaking through their leaves and branches threw a pattern of light and shade on the sandy footway. Ikemefuna heard a whisper close behind him and turned round sharply. The man who had whispered now called out aloud, urging the others to hurry up. "We still have a long way to go," he said. Then he and another man went before Ikemefuna and set a faster pace. Thus the men of Umuofia pursued their way, armed with sheathed machetes, and Ikemefuna, carrying a pot of palm-wine on his head, walked in their midst. Although he had felt uneasy at first, he was not afraid now. Okonkwo walked behind him. He could hardly imagine that Okonkwo was not his real father. He had never been fond of his real father, and at the end of three years he had become very distant indeed. But his mother and his three-year-old sister... of course she would not be three now, but six. Would he recognise her now? She must have grown quite big. How his mother would weep for joy, and thank Okonkwo for having looked after him so well and for bringing him back. She would want to hear everything that had happened to him in all these years. Could he remember them all? He would tell her about Nwoye and his mother, and about the locusts... Then quite suddenly a thought came upon him. His mother might be dead. He tried in vain to force the thought out of his mind. Then he tried to settle the matter the way he used to settle such matters when he was a little boy. He still remembered the song: Eze elina, elina! Sala Eze ilikwa ya Ikwaba akwa ogholi Ebe Danda nechi eze Ebe Uzuzu nete egwu Sala He sang it in his mind, and walked to its beat. If the song ended on his right foot, his mother was alive. If it ended on his left, she was dead. No, not dead, but ill. It ended on the right. She was alive and well. He sang the song again, and it ended on the left. But the second time did not count. The first voice gets to Chukwu, or God's house. That was a favourite saying of children. Ikemefuna felt like a child once more. It must be the thought of going home to his mother. One of the men behind him cleared his throat. Ikemefuna looked back, and the man growled at him to go on and not stand looking back. The way he said it sent cold fear down Ikemefuna's back. His hands trembled vaguely on the black pot he carried. Why had Okonkwo withdrawn to the rear? Ikemefuna felt his legs melting under him. And he was afraid to look back. As the man who had cleared his throat drew up and raised his machete, Okonkwo looked away. He heard the blow. The pot fell and broke in the sand. He heard Ikemefuna cry, "My father, they have killed me!" as he ran towards him. Dazed with fear, Okonkwo drew his machete and cut him down. He was afraid of being thought weak. As soon as his father walked in, that night, Nwoye knew that Ikemefuna had been killed, and something seemed to give way inside him, like the snapping of a tightened bow. He did not cry. He just hung limp. He had had the same kind of feeling not long ago, during the last harvest season. Every child loved the harvest season. Those who were big enough to carry even a few yams in a tiny basket went with grown-ups to the farm. And if they could not help in digging up the yams, they could gather firewood together for roasting the ones that would be eaten there on the farm. This roasted yam soaked in red palm-oil and eaten in the open farm was sweeter than any meal at home. It was after such a day at the farm during the last harvest that Nwoye had felt for the first time a snapping inside him like the one he now felt. They were returning home with baskets of yams from a distant farm across the stream when they heard the voice of an infant crying in the thick forest. A sudden hush had fallen on the women, who had been talking, and they had quickened their steps. Nwoye had heard that twins were put in earthenware pots and thrown away in the forest, but he had never yet come across them. A vague chill had descended on him and his head had seemed to swell, like a solitary walker at night who passes an evil spirit on the way. Then something had given way inside him. It descended on him again, this feeling, when his father walked in that night after killing Ikemefuna. CHAPTER EIGHT Okonkwo did not taste any food for two days after the death of Ikemefuna. He drank palm-wine from morning till night, and his eyes were red and fierce like the eyes of a rat when it was caught by the tail and dashed against the floor. He called his son, Nwoye, to sit with him in his obi. But the boy was afraid of him and slipped out of the hut as soon as he noticed him dozing. He did not sleep at night. He tried not to think about Ikemefuna,-but the more he tried the more he thought about him. Once he got up from bed and walked about his compound. But he was so weak that his legs could hardly carry him. He felt like a drunken giant walking with the limbs of a mosquito. Now and then a cold shiver descended on his head and spread down his body. On the third day he asked his second wife, Ekwefi, to roast plantains for him. She prepared it the way he likedwith slices of oil-bean and fish. "You have not eaten for two days," said his daughter Ezinma when she brought the food to him. "So you must finish this." She sat down and stretched her legs in front of her. Okonkwo ate the food absent-mindedly. 'She should have been a boy,' he thought as he looked at his ten-year-old daughter. He passed her a piece of fish. "Go and bring me some cold water," he said. Ezinma rushed out of the hut, chewing the fish, and soon returned with a bowl of cool water from the earthen pot in her mother's hut. Okonkwo took the bowl from her and gulped the water down. He ate a few more pieces of plantain and pushed the dish aside. "Bring me my bag," he asked, and Ezinma brought his goatskin bag from the far end of the hut. He searched in it for his snuff-bottle. It was a deep bag and took almost the whole length of his arm. It contained other things apart from his snuff-bottle. There was a drinking horn in it, and also a drinking gourd, and they knocked against each other as he searched. When he brought out the snuff-bottle he tapped it a few times against his knee-cap before taking out some snuff on the palm of his left hand. Then he remembered that he had not taken out his snuff-spoon. He searched his bag again and brought out a small, flat, ivory spoon, with which he carried the brown snuff to his nostrils. Ezinma took the dish in one hand and the empty water bowl in the other and went back to her mother's hut. "She should have been a boy," Okonkwo said to himself again. His mind went back to Ikemefuna and he shivered. If only he could find some work to do he would be able to forget. But it was the season of rest between the harvest and the next planting season. The only work that men did at this time was covering the walls of their compound with new palm fronds. And Okonkwo had already done that. He had finished it on the very day the locusts came, when he had worked on one side of the wall and Ikemefuna and Nwoye on the other. "When did you become a shivering old woman," Okonkwo asked himself, "you, who are known in all the nine villages for your valour in war? How can a man who has killed five men in battle fall to pieces because he has added a boy to their number? Okonkwo, you have become a woman indeed." He sprang to his feet, hung his goatskin bag on his shoulder and went to visit his friend, Obierika. Obierika was sitting outside under the shade of an orange tree making thatches from leaves of the raffia-palm. He exchanged greetings with Okonkwo and led the way into his obi. "I was coming over to see you as soon as I finished that thatch," he said, rubbing off the grains of sand that clung to his thighs. "Is it well?" Okonkwo asked. "Yes," replied Obierika. "My daughter's suitor is coming today and I hope we will clinch the matter of the bride-price. I want you to be there." Just then Obierika's son, Maduka, came into the obi from outside, greeted Okonkwo and turned towards the compound, "Come and shake hands with me," Okonkwo said to the lad. "Your wrestling the other day gave me much happiness." The boy smiled, shook hands with Okonkwo and went into the compound. "He will do great things," Okonkwo said. "If I had a son like him I should be happy. I am worried about Nwoye. A bowl of pounded yams can throw him in a wrestling match. His two younger brothers are more promising. But I can tell you, Obierika, that my children do not resemble me. Where are the young suckers that will grow when the old banana tree dies? If Ezinma had been a boy I would have been happier. She has the right spirit." "You worry yourself for nothing," said Obierika. "The children are still very young." "Nwoye is old enough to impregnate a woman. At his age I was already fending for myself. No, my friend, he is not too young. A chick that will grow into a cock can be spotted the very day it hatches. I have done my best to make Nwoye grow into a man, but there is too much of his mother in him." "Too much of his grandfather," Obierika thought, but he did not say it. The same thought also came to Okonkwo's mind. But he had long learned how to lay that ghost. Whenever the thought of his father's weakness and failure troubled him he expelled it by thinking about his own strength and success. And so he did now. His mind went to his latest show of manliness. "I cannot understand why you refused to come with us to kill that boy," he asked Obierika. "Because I did not want to," Obierika replied sharply. "I had something better to do." "You sound as if you question the authority and the decision of the Oracle, who said he should die." "I do not. Why should I? But the Oracle did not ask me to carry out its decision." "But someone had to do it. If we were all afraid of blood, it would not be done. And what do you think the Oracle would do then?" "You know very well, Okonkwo, that I am not afraid of blood and if anyone tells you that I am, he is telling a lie. And let me tell you one thing, my friend. If I were you I would have stayed at home. What you have done will not please the Earth. It is the kind of action for which the goddess wipes out whole families." "The Earth cannot punish me for obeying her messenger," Okonkwo said. "A child's fingers are not scalded by a piece of hot yam which its mother puts into its palm." "That is true," Obierika agreed. "But if the Oracle said that my son should be killed I would neither dispute it nor be the one to do it." They would have gone on arguing had Ofoedu not come in just then. It was clear from his twinkling eyes that he had important news. But it would be impolite to rush him. Obierika offered him a lobe of the kola nut he had broken with Okonkwo. Ofoedu ate slowly and talked about the locusts. When he finished his kola nut he said: "The things that happen these days are very strange." "What has happened?" asked Okonkwo. "Do you know Ogbuefi Ndulue?" Ofoedu asked. "Ogbuefi Ndulue of Ire village," Okonkwo and Obierika said together. "He died this morning," said Ofoedu. "That is not strange. He was the oldest man in Ire," said Obierika. "You are right," Ofoedu agreed. "But you ought to ask why the drum has not beaten to tell Umuofia of his death." "Why?" asked Obierika and Okonkwo together. "That is the strange part of it. You know his first wife who walks with a stick?" "Yes. She is called Ozoemena." "That is so," said Ofoedu. "Ozoemena was, as you know, too old to attend Ndulue during his illness. His younger wives did that. When he died this morning, one of these women went to Ozoemena's hut and told her. She rose from her mat, took her stick and walked over to the obi. She knelt on her knees and hands at the threshold and called her husband, who was laid on a mat. 'Ogbuefi Ndulue,' she called, three times, and went back to her hut. When the youngest wife went to call her again to be present at the washing of the body, she found her lying on the mat, dead." "That is very strange, indeed," said Okonkwo. "They will put off Ndulue's funeral until his wife has been buried." "That is why the drum has not been beaten to tell Umuofia." "It was always said that Ndulue and Ozoemena had one mind," said Obierika. "I remember when I was a young boy there was a song about them. He could not do anything without telling her." "I did not know that," said Okonkwo. "I thought he was a strong man in his youth." "He was indeed," said Ofoedu. Okonkwo shook his head doubtfully. "He led Umuofia to war in those days," said Obierika. Okonkwo was beginning to feel like his old self again. All that he required was something to occupy his mind. If he had killed Ikemefuna during the busy planting season or harvesting it would not have been so bad, his mind would have been centred on his work. Okonkwo was not a man of thought but of action. But in absence of work, talking was the next best. Soon after Ofoedu left, Okonkwo took up his goatskin bag to go. "I must go home to tap my palm trees for the afternoon," he said. "Who taps your tall trees for you?" asked Obierika. "Umezulike," replied Okonkwo. "Sometimes I wish I had not taken the ozo title," said Obierika. "It wounds my heart to see these young men killing palm trees in the name of tapping." "It is so indeed," Okonkwo agreed. "But the law of the land must be obeyed." "I don't know how we got that law," said Obierika. "In many other clans a man of title is not forbidden to climb the palm tree. Here we say he cannot climb the tall tree but he can tap the short ones standing on the ground. It is like Dimaragana, who would not lend his knife for cutting up dogmeat because the dog was taboo to him, but offered to use his teeth." "I think it is good that our clan holds the ozo title in high esteem," said Okonkwo. "In those other clans you speak of, ozo is so low that every beggar takes it." "I was only speaking in jest," said Obierika. "In Abame and Aninta the title is worth less than two cowries. Every man wears the thread of title on his ankle, and does not lose it even if he steals." "They have indeed soiled the name of ozo," said Okonkwo as he rose to go. "It will not be very long now before my in-laws come," said Obierika. "I shall return very soon," said Okonkwo, looking at the position of the sun. There were seven men in Obierika's hut when Okonkwo returned. The suitor was a young man of about twenty-five, and with him were his father and uncle. On Obierika's side were his two elder brothers and Maduka, his sixteen-year-old son. "Ask Akueke's mother to send us some kola nuts," said Obierika to his son. Maduka vanished into the compound like lightning. The conversation at once centred on him, and everybody agreed that he was as sharp as a razor. "I sometimes think he is too sharp," said Obierika, somewhat indulgently. "He hardly ever walks. He is always in a hurry. If you are sending him on an errand he flies away before he has heard half of the message." "You were very much like that yourself," said his eldest brother. "As our people say, 'When mother-cow is chewing grass its young ones watch its mouth.' Maduka has been watching your mouth." As he was speaking the boy returned, followed by Akueke, his half-sister, carrying a wooden dish with three kola nuts and alligator pepper. She gave the dish to her father's eldest brother and then shook hands, very shyly, with her suitor and his relatives. She was about sixteen and just ripe for marriage. Her suitor and his relatives surveyed her young body with expert eyes as if to assure themselves that she was beautiful and ripe. She wore a coiffure which was done up into a crest in the middle of the head. Cam wood was rubbed lightly into her skin, and all over her body were black patterns drawn with uli. She wore a black necklace which hung down in three coils just above her full, succulent breasts. On her arms were red and yellow bangles, and on her waist four or five rows of jigida, or waist beads. When she had shaken hands, or rather held out her hand to be shaken, she returned to her mother's hut to help with the cooking. "Remove your jigida first," her mother warned as she moved near the fireplace to bring the pestle resting against the wall. "Every day I tell you that jigida and fire are not friends. But you will never hear. You grew your ears for decoration, not for hearing. One of these days your jigida will catch fire on your waist, and then you will know." Akueke moved to the other end of the hut and began to remove the waist-beads. It had to be done slowly and carefully, taking each string separately, else it would break and the thousand tiny rings would have to be strung together again. She rubbed each string downwards with her palms until it passed the buttocks and slipped down to the floor around her feet. The men in the obi had already begun to drink the palm-wine which Akueke's suitor had brought. It was a very good wine and powerful, for in spite of the palm fruit hung across the mouth of the pot to restrain the lively liquor, white foam rose and spilled over. "That wine is the work of a good tapper," said Okonkwo. The young suitor, whose name was Ibe, smiled broadly and said to his father: "Do you hear that?" He then said to the others: "He will never admit that I am a good tapper." "He tapped three of my best palm trees to death," said his father, Ukegbu. "That was about five years ago," said Ibe, who had begun to pour out the wine, "before I learned how to tap." He filled the first horn and gave to his father. Then he poured out for the others. Okonkwo brought out his big horn from the goatskin bag, blew into it to remove any dust that might be there, and gave it to Ibe to fill. As the men drank, they talked about everything except the thing for which they had gathered. It was only after the pot had been emptied that the suitor's father cleared his voice and announced the object of their visit. Obierika then presented to him a small bundle of short broomsticks. Ukegbu counted them. "They are thirty?" he asked. Obierika nodded in agreement. "We are at last getting somewhere," Ukegbu said, and then turning to his brother and his son he said: "Let us go out and whisper together." The three rose and went outside. When they returned Ukegbu handed the bundle of sticks back to Obierika. He counted them,- instead of thirty there were now only fifteen. He passed them over to his eldest brother, Machi, who also counted them and said: "We had not thought to go below thirty. But as the dog said, 'If I fall down for you and you fall down for me, it is play'. Marriage should be a play and not a fight so we are falling down again." He then added ten sticks to the fifteen and gave the bundle to Ukegbu. In this way Akuke's bride-price was finally settled at twenty bags of cowries. It was already dusk when the two parties came to this agreement. "Go and tell Akueke's mother that we have finished," Obierika said to his son, Maduka. Almost immediately the women came in with a big bowl of foo-foo. Obierika's second wife followed with a pot of soup, and Maduka brought in a pot of palm-wine. As the men ate and drank palm-wine they talked about the customs of their neighbours. "It was only this morning," said Obierika, "that Okonkwo and I were talking about Abame and Aninta, where titled men climb trees and pound foo-foo for their wives." "All their customs are upside-down. They do not decide bride-price as we do, with sticks. They haggle and bargain as if they were buying a goat or a cow in the market." "That is very bad," said Obierika's eldest brother. "But what is good in one place is bad in another place. In Umunso they do not bargain at all, not even with broomsticks. The suitor just goes on bringing bags of cowries until his in-laws tell him to stop. It is a bad custom because it always leads to a quarrel." "The world is large," said Okonkwo. "I have even heard that in some tribes a man's children belong to his wife and her family." "That cannot be," said Machi. "You might as well say that the woman lies on top of the man when they are making the children." "It is like the story of white men who, they say, are white like this piece of chalk," said Obierika. He held up a piece of chalk, which every man kept in his obi and with which his guests drew lines on the floor before they ate kola nuts. "And these white men, they say, have no toes." "And have you never seen them?" asked Machi. "Have you?" asked Obierika. "One of them passes here frequently," said Machi. "His name is Amadi." Those who knew Amadi laughed. He was a leper, and the polite name for leprosy was "the white skin." CHAPTER NINE For the first time in three nights, Okonkwo slept. He woke up once in the middle of the night and his mind went back to the past three days without making him feel uneasy. He began to wonder why he had felt uneasy at all. It was like a man wondering in broad daylight why a dream had appeared so terrible to him at night. He stretched himself and scratched his thigh where a mosquito had bitten him as he slept. Another one was wailing near his right ear. He slapped the ear and hoped he had killed it. Why do they always go for one's ears? When he was a child his mother had told him a story about it. But it was as silly as all women's stories. Mosquito, she had said, had asked Ear to marry him, whereupon Ear fell on the floor in uncontrollable laughter. "How much longer do you think you will live?" she asked. "You are already a skeleton." Mosquito went away humiliated, and any time he passed her way he told Ear that he was still alive. Okonkwo turned on his side and went back to sleep. He was roused in the morning by someone banging on his door. "Who is that?" he growled. He knew it must be Ekwefi. Of his three wives Ekwefi was the only one who would have the audacity to bang on his door. "Ezinma is dying," came her voice, and all the tragedy and sorrow of her life were packed in those words. Okonkwo sprang from his bed, pushed back the bolt on his door and ran into Ekwefi's hut. Ezinma lay shivering on a mat beside a huge fire that her mother had kept burning all night. "It is iba," said Okonkwo as he took his machete and went into the bush to collect the leaves and grasses and barks of trees that went into making the medicine for iba. Ekwefi knelt beside the sick child, occasionally feeling with her palm the wet, burning forehead. Ezinma was an only child and the centre of her mother's world. Very often it was Ezinma who decided what food her mother should prepare. Ekwefi even gave her such delicacies as eggs, which children were rarely allowed to eat because such food tempted them to steal. One day as Ezinma was eating an egg Okonkwo had come in unexpectedly from his hut. He was greatly shocked and swore to beat Ekwefi if she dared to give the child eggs again. But it was impossible to refuse Ezinma anything. After her father's rebuke she developed an even keener appetite for eggs. And she enjoyed above all the secrecy in which she now ate them. Her mother always took her into their bedroom and shut the door. Ezinma did not call her mother Nne like all children. She called her by her name, Ekwefi, as her father and other grownup people did. The relationship between them was not only that of mother and child. There was something in it like the companionship of equals, which was strengthened by such little conspiracies as eating eggs in the bedroom. Ekwefi had suffered a good deal in her life. She had borne ten children and nine of them had died in infancy, usually before the age of three. As she buried one child after another her sorrow gave way to despair and then to grim resignation. The birth of her children, which should be a woman's crowning glory, became for Ekwefi mere physical agony devoid of promise. The naming ceremony after seven market weeks became an empty ritual. Her deepening despair found expression in the names she gave her children. One of them was a pathetic cry, Onwumbiko "Death, I implore you." But Death took no notice,- Onwumbiko died in his fifteenth month. The next child was a girl, Ozoemena "May it not happen again." She died in her eleventh month, and two others after her. Ekwefi then became defiant and called her next child Onwuma "Death may please himself." And he did. After the death of Ekwefi's second child, Okonkwo had gone to a medicine man, who was also a diviner of the Afa Oracle, to enquire what was amiss. This man told him that the child was an ogbanje, one of those wicked children who, when they died, entered their mothers' wombs to be born again. "When your wife becomes pregnant again," he said, "let her not sleep in her hut. Let her go and stay with her people. In that way she will elude her wicked tormentor and break its evil cycle of birth and death." Ekwefi did as she was asked. As soon as she became pregnant she went to live with her old mother in another village. It was there that her third child was born and circumcised on the eighth day. She did not return to Okonkwo's compound until three days before the naming ceremony. The child was called Onwumbiko. Onwumbiko was not given proper burial when he died. Okonkwo had called in another medicine man who was famous in the clan for his great knowledge about ogbanje children. His name was Okagbue Uyanwa. Okagbue was a very striking figure, tall, with a full beard and a bald head. He was light in complexion and his eyes were red and fiery. He always gnashed his teeth as he listened to those who came to consult him. He asked Okonkwo a few questions about the dead child. All the neighbours and relations who had come to mourn gathered round them. "On what market-day was it born?" he asked. "Oye," replied Okonkwo. "And it died this morning?" Okonkwo said yes, and only then realised for the first time that the child had died on the same market-day as it had been born. The neighbours and relations also saw the coincidence and said among themselves that it was very significant. "Where do you sleep with your wife, in your obi or in her own hut?" asked the medicine man. "In her hut." "In future call her into your obi." The medicine man then ordered that there should be no mourning for the dead child. He brought out a sharp razor from the goatskin bag slung from his left shoulder and began to mutilate the child. Then he took it away to bury in the Evil Forest, holding it by the ankle and dragging it on the ground behind him. After such treatment it would think twice before coming again, unless it was one of the stubborn ones who returned, carrying the stamp of their mutilationa missing finger or perhaps a dark line where the medicine man's razor had cut them. By the time Onwumbiko died Ekwefi had become a very bitter woman. Her husband's first wife had already had three sons, all strong and healthy. When she had borne her third son in succession, Okonkwo had slaughtered a goat for her, as was the custom. Ekwefi had nothing but good wishes for her. But she had grown so bitter about her own chi that she could not rejoice with others over their good fortune. And so, on the day that Nwoye's mother celebrated the birth of her three sons with feasting and music, Ekwefi was the only person in the happy company who went about with a cloud on her brow. Her husband's wife took this for malevolence, as husbands' wives were wont to. How could she know that Ekwefi's bitterness did not flow outwards to others but inwards into her own soul,- that she did not blame others for their good fortune but her own evil chi who denied her any? At last Ezinma was born, and although ailing she seemed determined to live. At first Ekwefi accepted her, as she had accepted otherswith listless resignation. But when she lived on to her fourth, fifth and sixth years, love returned once more to her mother, and, with love, anxiety. She determined to nurse her child to health, and she put all her being into it. She was rewarded by occasional spells of health during which Ezinma bubbled with energy like fresh palm-wine. At such times she seemed beyond danger. But all of a sudden she would go down again. Everybody knew she was an ogbanje. These sudden bouts of sickness and health were typical of her kind. But she had lived so long that perhaps she had decided to stay. Some of them did become tired of their evil rounds of birth and death, or took pity on their mothers, and stayed. Ekwefi believed deep inside her that Ezinma had come to stay. She believed because it was that faith alone that gave her own life any kind of meaning. And this faith had been strengthened when a year or so ago a medicine man had dug up Ezinma's iyi-uwa. Everyone knew then that she would live because her bond with the world of ogbanje had been broken. Ekwefi was reassured. But such was her anxiety for her daughter that she could not rid herself completely of her fear. And although she believed that the iyi-uwa which had been dug up was genuine, she could not ignore the fact that some really evil children sometimes misled people into digging up a specious one. But Ezinma's iyi-uwa had looked real enough. It was a smooth pebble wrapped in a dirty rag. The man who dug it up was the same Okagbue who was famous in all the clan for his knowledge in these matters. Ezinma had not wanted to cooperate with him at first. But that was only to be expected. No ogbanje would yield her secrets easily, and most of them never did because they died too young - before they could be asked questions. "Where did you bury your iyi-uwa?" Okagbue had asked Ezinma. She was nine then and was just recovering from a serious illness. "What is iyi-uwa?" she asked in return. "You know what it is. You buried it in the ground somewhere so that you can die and return again to torment your mother." Ezinma looked at her mother, whose eyes, sad and pleading, were fixed on her. "Answer the question at once," roared Okonkwo, who stood beside her. All the family were there and some of the neighbours too. "Leave her to me," the medicine man told Okonkwo in a cool, confident voice. He turned again to Ezinma. "Where did you bury your iyi-uwa?" "Where they bury children," she replied, and the quiet spectators murmured to themselves. "Come along then and show me the spot," said the medicine man. The crowd set out with Ezinma leading the way and Okagbue following closely behind her. Okonkwo came next and Ekwefi followed him. When she came to the main road, Ezinma turned left as if she was going to the stream. "But you said it was where they bury children?" asked the medicine man. "No," said Ezinma, whose feeling of importance was manifest in her sprightly walk. She sometimes broke into a run and stopped again suddenly. The crowd followed her silently. Women and children returning from the stream with pots of water on their heads wondered what was happening until they saw Okagbue and guessed that it must be something to do with ogbanje. And they all knew Ekwefi and her daughter very well. When she got to the big udala tree Ezinma turned left into the bush, and the crowd followed her. Because of her size she made her way through trees and creepers more quickly than her followers. The bush was alive with the tread of feet on dry leaves and sticks and the moving aside of tree branches. Ezinma went deeper and deeper and the crowd went with her. Then she suddenly turned round and began to walk back to the road. Everybody stood to let her pass and then filed after her. "If you bring us all this way for nothing I shall beat sense into you," Okonkwo threatened. "I have told you to let her alone. I know how to deal with them," said Okagbue. Ezinma led the way back to the road, looked left and right and turned right. And so they arrived home again. "Where did you bury your iyi-uwa?" asked Okagbue when Ezinma finally stopped outside her father's obi. Okagbue's voice was unchanged. It was quiet and confident. "It is near that orange tree," Ezinma said. "And why did you not say so, you wicked daughter of Akalogoli?" Okonkwo swore furiously. The medicine man ignored him. "Come and show me the exact spot," he said quietly to Ezinma. "It is here," she said when they got to the tree. "Point at the spot with your finger," said Okagbue. "It is here," said Ezinma touching the ground with her finger. Okonkwo stood by, rumbling like thunder in the rainy season. "Bring me a hoe," said Okagbue. 'When Ekwefi brought the hoe, he had already put aside his goatskin bag and his big cloth and was in his underwear, a long and thin strip of cloth wound round the waist like a belt and then passed between the legs to be fastened to the belt behind. He immediately set to work digging a pit where Ezinma had indicated. The neighbours sat around watching the pit becoming deeper and deeper. The dark top soil soon gave way to the bright red earth with which women scrubbed the floors and walls of huts. Okagbue worked tirelessly and in silence, his back shining with perspiration. Okonkwo stood by the pit. He asked Okagbue to come up and rest while he took a hand. But Okagbue said he was not tired yet. Ekwefi went into her hut to cook yams. Her husband had brought out more yams than usual because the medicine man had to be fed. Ezinma went with her and helped in preparing the vegetables. "There is too much green vegetable," she said. "Don't you see the pot is full of yams?" Ekwefi asked. "And you know how leaves become smaller after cooking." "Yes," said Ezinma, "that was why the snake-lizard killed his mother." "Very true," said Ekwefi. "He gave his mother seven baskets of vegetables to cook and in the end there were only three. And so he killed her," said Ezinma. "That is not the end of the story." "Oho," said Ezinma. "I remember now. He brought another seven baskets and cooked them himself. And there were again only three. So he killed himself too." Outside the obi Okagbue and Okonkwo were digging the pit to find where Ezinma had buried her iyi-uwa. Neighbours sat around, watching. The pit was now so deep that they no longer saw the digger. They only saw the red earth he threw up mounting higher and higher. Okonkwo's son, Nwoye, stood near the edge of the pit because he wanted to take in all that happened. Okagbue had again taken over the digging from Okonkwo. He worked, as usual, in silence. The neighbours and Okonkwo's wives were now talking. The children had lost interest and were playing. Suddenly Okagbue sprang to the surface with the agility of a leopard. "It is very near now," he said. "I have felt it." There was immediate excitement and those who were sitting jumped to their feet. "Call your wife and child," he said to Okonkwo. But Ekwefi and Ezinma had heard the noise and run out to see what it was. Okagbue went back into the pit, which was now surrounded by spectators. After a few more hoe-fuls of earth he struck the iyi-uwa. He raised it carefully with the hoe and threw it to the surface. Some women ran away in fear when it was thrown. But they soon returned and everyone was gazing at the rag from a reasonable distance. Okagbue emerged and without saying a word or even looking at the spectators he went to his goatskin bag, took out two leaves and began to chew them. When he had swallowed them, he took up the rag with his left hand and began to untie it. And then the smooth, shiny pebble fell out. He picked it up. "Is this yours?" he asked Ezinma. "Yes," she replied. All the women shouted with joy because Ekwefi's troubles were at last ended. All this had happened more than a year ago and Ezinma had not been ill since. And then suddenly she had begun to shiver in the night. Ekwefi brought her to the fireplace, spread her mat on the floor and built a fire. But she had got worse and worse. As she knelt by her, feeling with her palm the wet, burning forehead, she prayed a thousand times. Although her husband's wives were saying that it was nothing more than iba, she did not hear them. Okonkwo returned from the bush carrying on his left shoulder a large bundle of grasses and leaves, roots and barks of medicinal trees and shrubs. He went into Ekwefi's hut, put down his load and sat down. "Get me a pot," he said, "and leave the child alone." Ekwefi went to bring the pot and Okonkwo selected the best from his bundle, in their due proportions, and cut them up. He put them in the pot and Ekwefi poured in some water. "Is that enough?" she asked when she had poured in about half of the water in the bowl. "A little more... I said a little. Are you deaf?" Okonkwo roared at her. She set the pot on the fire and Okonkwo took up his machete to return to his obi. "You must watch the pot carefully," he said as he went, "and don't allow it to boil over. If it does its power will be gone." He went away to his hut and Ekwefi began to tend the medicine pot almost as if it was itself a sick child. Her eyes went constantly from Ezinma to the boiling pot and back to Ezinma. Okonkwo returned when he felt the medicine had cooked long enough. He looked it over and said it was done. "Bring me a low stool for Ezinma," he said, "and a thick mat." He took down the pot from the fire and placed it in front of the stool. He then roused Ezinma and placed her on the stool, astride the steaming pot. The thick mat was thrown over both. Ezinma struggled to escape from the choking and overpowering steam, but she was held down. She started to cry. When the mat was at last removed she was drenched in perspiration. Ekwefi mopped her with a piece of cloth and she lay down on a dry mat and was soon asleep. CHAPTER TEN Large crowds began to gather on the village ilo as soon as the edge had worn off the sun's heat and it was no longer painful on the body. Most communal ceremonies took place at that time of the day, so that even when it was said that a ceremony would begin "after the midday meal" everyone understood that it would begin a long time later, when the sun's heat had softened. It was clear from the way the crowd stood or sat that the ceremony was for men. There were many women, but they looked on from the fringe like outsiders. The titled men and elders sat on their stools waiting for the trials to begin. In front of them was a row of stools on which nobody sat. There were nine of them. Two little groups of people stood at a respectable distance beyond the stools. They faced the elders. There were three men in one group and three men and one woman in the other. The woman was Mgbafo and the three men with her were her brothers. In the other group were her husband, Uzowulu, and his relatives. Mgbafo and her brothers were as still as statues into whose faces the artist has moulded defiance. Uzowulu and his relative, on the other hand, were whispering together. It looked like whispering, but they were really talking at the top of their voices. Everybody in the crowd was talking. It was like the market. From a distance the noise was a deep rumble carried by the wind. An iron gong sounded, setting up a wave of expectation in the crowd. Everyone looked in the direction of the egwugwu house. Gome, gome, gome, gome went the gong, and a powerful flute blew a high-pitched blast. Then came the voices of the egwugwu, guttural and awesome. The wave struck the women and children and there was a backward stampede. But it was momentary. They were already far enough where they stood and there was room for running away if any of them should go towards them. The drum sounded again and the flute blew. The house was now a pandemonium of quavering voices: Am oyim de de de de! filled the air as the spirits of the ancestors, just emerged from the earth, greeted themselves in their esoteric language. The egwugwu house into which they emerged faced the forest, away from the crowd, who saw only its back with the many-coloured patterns and drawings done by specially chosen women at regular intervals. These women never saw the inside of the hut. No woman ever did. They scrubbed and painted the outside walls under the supervision of men. If they imagined what was inside, they kept their imagination to themselves. No woman ever asked questions about the most powerful and the most secret cult in the clan. Am oyim de de de de! flew around the dark, closed hut like tongues of fire. The ancestral spirits of the clan were abroad. The metal gong beat continuously now and the flute, shrill and powerful, floated on the chaos. And then the egwugwu appeared. The women and children sent up a great shout and took to their heels. It was instinctive. A woman fled as soon as an egwugwu came in sight. And when, as on that day, nine of the greatest masked spirits in the clan came out together it was a terrifying spectacle. Even Mgbafo took to her heels and had to be restrained by her brothers. Each of the nine egwugwu represented a village of the clan. Their leader was called Evil Forest. Smoke poured out of his head. The nine villages of Umuofia had grown out of the nine sons of the first father of the clan. Evil Forest represented the village of Umueru, or the children of Eru, who was the eldest of the nine sons. "Umuofia kwenu!" shouted the leading egwugwu, pushing the air with his raffia arms. The elders of the clan replied, "Yaa!" "Umuofia kwenu!" "Yaa!" "Umuofia kwenu!" "Yaa!" Evil Forest then thrust the pointed end of his rattling staff into the earth. And it began to shake and rattle, like something agitating with a metallic life. He took the first of the empty stools and the eight other egwugwu began to sit in order of seniority after him. Okonkwo's wives, and perhaps other women as well, might have noticed that the second egwugwu had the springy walk of Okonkwo. And they might also have noticed that Okonkwo was not among the titled men and elders who sat behind the row of egwugwu. But if they thought these things they kept them within themselves. The egwugwu with the springy walk was one of the dead fathers of the clan. He looked terrible with the smoked raffia "body, a huge wooden face painted white except for the round hollow eyes and the charred teeth that were as big as a man's fingers. On his head were two powerful horns. When all the egwugwu had sat down and the sound of the many tiny bells and rattles on their bodies had subsided, Evil Forest addressed the two groups of people facing them. "Uzowulu's body, I salute you," he said. Spirits always addressed humans as "bodies." Uzowulu bent down and touched the earth with his right hand as a sign of submission. "Our father, my hand has touched the ground," he said. "Uzowulu's body, do you know me?" asked the spirit. "How can I know you, father? You are beyond our knowledge." Evil Forest then turned to the other group and addressed the eldest of the three brothers. "The body of Odukwe, I greet you," he said, and Odukwe bent down and touched the earth. The hearing then began. Uzowulu stepped forward and presented his case. "That woman standing there is my wife, Mgbafo. I married her with my money and my yams. I do not owe my in-laws anything. I owe them no yams. I owe them no coco-yams. One morning three of them came to my house, beat me up and took my wife and children away. This happened in the rainy season. I have waited in vain for my wife to return. At last I went to my in-laws and said to them, 'You have taken back your sister. I did not send her away. You yourselves took her. The law of the clan is that you should return her bride-price.' But my wife's brothers said they had nothing to tell me. So I have brought the matter to the fathers of the clan. My case is finished. I salute you." "Your words are good," said the leader of the ecjwucjwu. "Let us hear Odukwe. His words may also be good." Odukwe was short and thickset. He stepped forward, saluted the spirits and began his story. "My in-law has told you that we went to his house, beat him up and took our sister and her children away. All that is true. He told you that he came to take back her bride-price and we refused to give it him. That also is true. My in-law, Uzowulu, is a beast. My sister lived with him for nine years. During those years no single day passed in the sky without his beating the woman. We have tried to settle their quarrels time without number and on each occasion Uzowulu was guilty "It is a lie!" Uzowulu shouted. "Two years ago," continued Odukwe, "when she was pregnant, he beat her until she miscarried." "It is a lie. She miscarried after she had gone to sleep with her lover." "Uzowulu's body, I salute you," said Evil Forest, silencing him. "What kind of lover sleeps with a pregnant woman?" There was a loud murmur of approbation from the crowd. Odukwe continued: "Last year when my sister was recovering from an illness, he beat her again so that if the neighbours had not gone in to save her she would have been killed. We heard of it, and did as you have been told. The law of Umuofia is that if a woman runs away from her husband her bride-price is returned. But in this case she ran away to save her life. Her two children belong to Uzowulu. We do not dispute it, but they are too young to leave their mother. If, in the other hand, Uzowulu should recover from his madness and come in the proper way to beg his wife to return she will do so on the understanding that if he ever beats her again we shall cut off his genitals for him." The crowd roared with laughter. Evil Forest rose to his feet and order was immediately restored. A steady cloud of smoke rose from his head. He sat down again and called two witnesses. They were both Uzowulu's neighbours, and they agreed about the beating. Evil Forest then stood up, pulled out his staff and thrust it into the earth again. He ran a few steps in the direction of the women,- they all fled in terror, only to return to their places almost immediately. The nine egwugwu then went away to consult together in their house. They were silent for a long time. Then the metal gong sounded and the flute was blown. The egwugwu had emerged once again from their underground home. They saluted one another and then reappeared on the ilo. "Umuofia kwenu!" roared Evil Forest, facing the elders and grandees of the clan. "Yaa!" replied the thunderous crowd,- then silence descended from the sky and swallowed the noise. Evil Forest began to speak and all the while he spoke everyone was silent. The eight other egwugwu were as still as statues. "We have heard both sides of the case," said Evil Forest. "Our duty is not to blame this man or to praise that, but to settle the dispute." He turned to Uzowulu's group and allowed a short pause. "Uzowulu's body, I salute you," he said. "Our father, my hand has touched the ground," replied Uzowulu, touching the earth. "Uzowulu's body, do you know me?" "How can I know you, father? You are beyond our knowledge," Uzowulu replied. "I am Evil Forest. I kill a man on the day that his life is sweetest to him." "That is true," replied Uzowulu. "Go to your in-laws with a pot of wine and beg your wife to return to you. It is not bravery when a man fights with a woman." He turned to Odukwe, and allowed a brief pause. "Odukwes body, I greet you," he said. "My hand is on the ground," replied Okukwe. "Do you know me?" "No man can know you," replied Odukwe. "I am Evil Forest, I am Dry-meat-that-fills-the-mouth, I am Fire-that-bums- without-faggots. If your in-law brings wine to you, let your sister go with him. I salute you." He pulled his staff from the hard earth and thrust it back. "Umuofia kwenu!" he roared, and the crowd answered. "I don't know why such a trifle should come before, then said one elder to another. "Don't you know what kind of man Uzowulu is? He will not listen to any other decision," replied the other. As they spoke two other groups of people had replaced the first before the egwugwu, and a great land case began. CHAPTER EFEVEN The night was impenetrably dark. The moon had been rising later and later every night until now it was seen only at dawn. And whenever the moon forsook evening and rose at cock-crow the nights were as black as charcoal. Ezinma and her mother sat on a mat on the floor after their supper of yam foo-foo and bitter-leaf soup. A palm-oil lamp gave out yellowish light. Without it, it would have been impossible to eat,-one could not have known where one's mouth was in the darkness of that night. There was an oil lamp in all the four huts on Okonkwo's compound, and each hut seen from the others looked like a soft eye of yellow half-light set in the solid massiveness of night. The world was silent except for the shrill cry of insects, which was part of the night, and the sound of wooden mortar and pestle as Nwayieke pounded her foo-foo. Nwayieke lived four compounds away, and she was notorious for her late cooking. Every woman in the neighbourhood knew the sound of Nwayieke's mortar and pestle. It was also part of the night. Okonkwo had eaten from his wives' dishes and was now reclining with his back against the wall. He searched his bag and brought out his snuff-bottle. He turned it on to his left palm, but nothing came out. He hit the bottle against his knee to shake up the tobacco. That was always the trouble with Okeke's snuff. It very quickly went damp, and there was too much saltpetre in it. Okonkwo had not bought snuff from him for a long time. Idigo was the man who knew how to grind good snuff. But he had recently fallen ill. Low voices, broken now and again by singing, reached Okonkwo from his wives' huts as each woman and her children told folk stories. Ekwefi and her daughter, Ezinma, sat on a mat on the floor. It was Ekwefi's turn to tell a story. "Once upon a time," she began, "all the birds were invited to a feast in the sky. They were very happy and began to prepare themselves for the great day. They painted their bodies with red cam wood and drew beautiful patterns on them with uli. "Tortoise saw all these preparations and soon discovered what it all meant. Nothing that happened in the world of the animals ever escaped his notice,- he was full of cunning. As soon as he heard of the great feast in the sky his throat began to itch at the very thought. There was a famine in those days and Tortoise had not eaten a good meal for two moons. His body rattled like a piece of dry stick in his empty shell. So he began to plan how he would go to the sky." "But he had no wings," said Ezinma. "Be patient," replied her mother. "That is the story. Tortoise had no wings, but he went to the birds and asked to be allowed to go with them. "'We know you too well,' said the birds when they had heard him. 'You are full of cunning and you are ungrateful. If we allow you to come with us you will soon begin your mischief.' "'You do not know me,' said Tortoise. 'I am a changed man. I have learned that a man who makes trouble for others is also making it for himself.' "Tortoise had a sweet tongue, and within a short time all the birds agreed that he was a changed man, and they each gave him a feather, with which he made two wings. "At last the great day came and Tortoise was the first to arrive at the meeting place. When all the birds had gathered together, they set off in a body. Tortoise was very happy and voluble as he flew among the birds, and he was soon chosen as the man to speak for the party because he was a great orator. "There is one important thing which we must not forget,' he said as they flew on their way. 'When people are invited to a great feast like this, they take new names for the occasion. Our hosts in the sky will expect us to honour this age-old custom.' "None of the birds had heard of this custom but they knew that Tortoise, in spite of his failings in other directions, was a widely-travelled man who knew the customs of different peoples. And so they each took a new name. When they had all taken. Tortoise also took one. He was to be called 'All of you'. "At last the party arrived in the sky and their hosts were very happy to see them. Tortoise stood up in his many-coloured plumage and thanked them for their invitation. His speech was so eloquent that all the birds were glad they had brought him, and nodded their heads in approval of all he said. Their hosts took him as the king of the birds, especially as he looked somewhat different from the others. "After kola nuts had been presented and eaten, the people of the sky set before their guests the most delectable dishes Tortoise had even seen or dreamed of. The soup was brought out hot from the fire and in the very pot in which it had been cooked. It was full of meat and fish. Tortoise began to sniff aloud. There was pounded yam and also yam pottage cooked with palm-oil and fresh fish. There were also pots of palm-wine. When everything had been set before the guests, one of the people of the sky came forward and tasted a little from each pot. He then invited the birds to eat. But Tortoise jumped to his feet and asked: Tor whom have you prepared this feast? "'For all of you,' replied the man. "Tortoise turned to the birds and said: 'You remember that my name is All of you. The custom here is to serve the spokesman first and the others later. They will serve you when I have eaten.' "He began to eat and the birds grumbled angrily. The people of the sky thought it must be their custom to leave all the food for their king. And so Tortoise ate the best part of the food and then drank two pots of palm-wine, so that he was full of food and drink and his body filled out in his shell. "The birds gathered round to eat what was left and to peck at the bones he had thrown all about the floor. Some of them were too angry to eat. They chose to fly home on an empty stomach. But before they left each took back the feather he had lent to Tortoise. And there he stood in his hard shell full of food and wine but without any wings to fly home. He asked the birds to take a message for his wife, but they all refused. In the end Parrot, who had felt more angry than the others, suddenly changed his mind and agreed to take the message. "Tell my wife,' said Tortoise, 'to bring out all the soft things in my house and cover the compound with them so that I can jump down from the sky without very great danger.' "Parrot promised to deliver the message, and then flew away. But when he reached Tortoise's house he told his wife to bring out all the hard things in the house. And so she brought out her husband's hoes, machetes, spears, guns and even his cannon. Tortoise looked down from the sky and saw his wife bringing things out, but it was too far to see what they were. When all seemed ready he let himself go. He fell and fell and fell until he began to fear that he would never stop falling. And then like the sound of his cannon he crashed on the compound." "Did he die?" asked Ezinma. "No," replied Ekwefi. "His shell broke into pieces. But there was a great medicine man in the neighbourhood. Tortoise's wife sent for him and he gathered all the bits of shell and stuck them together. That is why Tortoise's shell is not smooth." "There is no song in the story," Ezinma pointed out. "No," said Ekwefi. "I shall think of another one with a song. But it is your turn now. "Once upon a time," Ezinma began, "Tortoise and Cat went to wrestle against Yamsno, that is not the beginning. Once upon a time there was a great famine in the land of animals. Everybody was lean except Cat, who was fat and whose body shone as if oil was rubbed on it..." She broke off because at that very moment a loud and high-pitched voice broke the outer silence of the night. It was Chielo, the priestess of Agbala, prophesying. There was nothing new in that. Once in a while Chielo was possessed by the spirit of her god and she began to prophesy. But tonight she was addressing her prophecy and greetings to Okonkwo, and so everyone in his family listened. The folk stories stopped. "Agbala do-o-o-o! Agbala ekeneo-o-o-o-o," came the voice like a shaip knife cutting through the night. "Okonkwo! Agbala ekme gio-o-o-o! Agbala cholu ifu ada ya Ezinmao-o-o-oi" At the mention of Ezinma's name Ekwefi jerked her head sharply like an animal that had sniffed death in the air. Her heart jumped painfully within her. The priestess had now reached Okonkwo's compound and was talking with him outside his hut. She was saying again and again that Agbala wanted to see his daughter, Ezinma. Okonkwo pleaded with her to come back in the morning because Ezinma was now asleep. But Chielo ignored what he was trying to say and went on shouting that Agbala wanted to see his daughter. Her voice was as clear as metal, and Okonkwo's women and children heard from their huts all that she said. Okonkwo was still pleading that the girl had been ill of late and was asleep. Ekwefi quickly took her to their bedroom and placed her on their high bamboo bed. The priestess screamed. "Beware, Okonkwo!" she warned. "Beware of exchanging words with Agbala. Does a man speak when a god speaks? Beware!" She walked through Okonkwo's hut into the circular compound and went straight toward Ekwefi's hut. Okonkwo came after her. "Ekwefi," she called, "Agbala greets you. Where is my daughter, Ezinma? Agbala wants to see her." Ekwefi came out from her hut carrying her oil lamp in her left hand. There was a light wind blowing, so she cupped her right hand to shelter the flame. Nwoye's mother, also carrying an oil lamp, emerged from her hut. The children stood in the darkness outside their hut watching the strange event. Okonkwo's youngest wife also came out and joined the others. "Where does Agbala want to see her?" Ekwefi asked. "Where else but in his house in the hills and the caves?" replied the priestess. "I will come with you, too," Ekwefi said firmly. "Tufia-al" the priestess cursed, her voice cracking like the angry bark of thunder in the dry season. "How dare you, woman, to go before the mighty Agbala of your own accord? Beware, woman, lest he strike you in his anger. Bring me my daughter." Ekwefi went into her hut and came out again with Ezinma. "Come, my daughter," said the priestess. "I shall carry you on my back. A baby on its mother's back does not know that the way is long." Ezinma began to cry. She was used to Chielo calling her "my daughter." But it was a different Chielo she now saw in the yellow half-light. "Don't cry, my daughter," said the priestess, "lest Agbala be angry with you." "Don't cry," said Ekwefi, "she will bring you back very soon. I shall give you some fish to eat." She went into the hut again and brought down the smoke-black basket in which she kept her dried fish and other ingredients for cooking soup. She broke a piece in two and gave it to Ezinma, who clung to her. "Don't be afraid," said Ekwefi, stroking her head, which was shaved in places, leaving a regular pattern of hair. They went outside again. The priestess bent down on one knee and Ezinma climbed on her back, her left palm closed on her fish and her eyes gleaming with tears. "Agbala do-o-o-o! Agbala ekeneo-o-o-o!..." Chielo began once again to chant greetings to her god. She turned round sharply and walked through Okonkwo's hut, bending very low at the eaves. Ezinma was crying loudly now, calling on her mother. The two voices disappeared into the thick darkness. A strange and sudden weakness descended on Ekwefi as she stood gazing in the direction of the voices like a hen whose only chick has been carried away by a kite. Ezinma's voice soon faded away and only Chielo was heard moving further and further into the distance. "Why do you stand there as though she had been kidnapped?" asked Okonkwo as he went back to his hut. "She will bring her back soon," Nwoye's mother said. But Ekwefi did not hear these consolations. She stood for a while, and then, all of a sudden, made up her mind. She hurried through Okonkwo's hut and went outside. "Where are you going?" he asked. "I am following Chielo," she replied and disappeared in the darkness. Okonkwo cleared his throat, and brought out his snuff-bottle from the goatskin bag by his side. The priestess' voice was already growing faint in the distance. Ekwefi hurried to the main footpath and turned left in the direction of the voice. Her eyes were useless to her in the darkness. But she picked her way easily on the sandy footpath hedged on either side by branches and damp leaves. She began to run, holding her breasts with her hands to stop them flapping noisily against her body. She hit her left foot against an outcropped root, and terror seized her. It was an ill omen. She ran faster. But Chielo's voice was still a long way away. Had she been running too? How could she go so fast with Ezinma on her back? Although the night was cool, Ekwefi was beginning to feel hot from her running. She continually ran into the luxuriant weeds and creepers that walled in the path. Once she tripped up and fell. Only then did she realise, with a start, that Chielo had stopped her chanting. Her heart beat violently and she stood still. Then Chielo's renewed outburst came from only a few paces ahead. But Ekwefi could not see her. She shut her eyes for a while and opened them again in an effort to see. But it was useless. She could not see beyond her nose. There were no stars in the sky because there was a rain-cloud. Fireflies went about with their tiny green lamps, which only made the darkness more profound. Between Chielo's outbursts the night was alive with the shrill tremor of forest insects woven into the darkness. "Agbala do-o-o-o!... Agbala ekeneo-o-o-o!..." Ekwefi trudged behind, neither getting too near nor keeping too far back. She thought they must be going towards the sacred cave. Now that she walked slowly she had time to think. What would she do when they got to the cave? She would not dare to enter. She would wait at the mouth, all alone in that fearful place. She thought of all the terrors of the night. She remembered that night, long ago, when she had seen Ogbu-agali-odu, one of those evil essences loosed upon the world by the potent "medicines" which the tribe had made in the distant past against its enemies but had now forgotten how to control. Ekwefi had been returning from the stream with her mother on a dark night like this when they saw its glow as it flew in their direction. They had thrown down their waterpots and lain by the roadside expecting the sinister light to descend on them and kill them. That was the only time Ekwefi ever saw Ogbu-agali-odu. But although it had happened so long ago, her blood still ran cold whenever she remembered that night. The priestess' voice came at longer intervals now, but its vigour was undiminished. The air was cool and damp with dew. Ezinma sneezed. Ekwefi muttered, "Life to you." At the same time the priestess also said, "Life to you, my daughter." Ezinma's voice from the darkness warmed her mother's heart. She trudged slowly along. And then the priestess screamed. "Somebody is walking behind me!" she said. "Whether you are spirit or man, may Agbala shave your head with a blunt razor! May he twist your neck until you see your heels!" Ekwefi stood rooted to the spot. One mind said to her: "Woman, go home before Agbala does you harm." But she could not. She stood until Chielo had increased the distance between them and she began to follow again. She had already walked so long that she began to feel a slight numbness in the limbs and in the head. Then it occurred to her that they could not have been heading for the cave. They must have bypassed it long ago,- they must be going towards Umuachi, the farthest village in the clan. Chielo's voice now came after long intervals. It seemed to Ekwefi that the night had become a little lighter. The cloud had lifted and a few stars were out. The moon must be preparing to rise, its sullenness over. When the moon rose late in the night, people said it was refusing food, as a sullen husband refuses his wife's food when they have quarrelled. "Agbala do-o-o-o! Umuachi! Agbala ekene unuo-o-ol" It was just as Ekwefi had thought. The priestess was now saluting the village of Umuachi. It was unbelievable, the distance they had covered. As they emerged into the open village from the narrow forest track the darkness was softened and it became possible to see the vague shape of trees. Ekwefi screwed her eyes up in an effort to see her daughter and the priestess, but whenever she thought she saw their shape it immediately dissolved like a melting lump of darkness. She walked numbly along. Chielo's voice was now rising continuously, as when she first set out. Ekwefi had a feeling of spacious openness, and she guessed they must be on the village ilo, or playground. And she realised too with something like a jerk that Chielo was no longer moving forward. She was, in fact, returning. Ekwefi quickly moved away from her line of retreat. Chielo passed by, and they began to go back the way they had come. It was a long and weary journey and Ekwefi felt like a sleepwalker most of the way. The moon was definitely rising, and although it had not yet appeared on the sky its light had already melted down the darkness. Ekwefi could now discern the figure of the priestess and her burden. She slowed down her pace so as to increase the distance between them. She was afraid of what might happen if Chielo suddenly turned round and saw her. She had prayed for the moon to rise. But now she found the half-light of the incipient moon more terrifying than darkness. The world was now peopled with vague, fantastic figures that dissolved under her steady gaze and then formed again in new shapes. At one stage Ekwefi was so afraid that she nearly called out to Chielo for companionship and human sympathy. What she had seen was the shape of a man climbing a palm tree, his head pointing to the earth and his legs skywards. But at that very moment Chielo's voice rose again in her possessed chanting, and Ekwefi recoiled, because there was no humanity there. It was not the same Chielo who sat with her in the market and sometimes bought beancakes for Ezinma, whom she called her daughter. It was a different womanthe priestess of Agbala, the Oracle of the Hills and Caves. Ekwefi trudged along between two fears. The sound of her benumbed steps seemed to come from some other person walking behind her. Her arms were folded across her bare breasts. Dew fell heavily and the air was cold. She could no longer think, not even about the terrors of night. She just jogged along in a half-sleep, only waking to full life when Chielo sang. At last they took a turning and began to head for the caves. From then on, Chielo never ceased in her chanting. She greeted her god in a multitude of namesthe owner of the future, the messenger of earth, the god who cut a man down when his life was sweetest to him. Ekwefi was also awakened and her benumbed fears revived. The moon was now up and she could see Chielo and Ezinma clearly. How a woman could carry a child of that size so easily and for so long was a miracle. But Ekwefi was not thinking about that. Chielo was not a woman that night. "Agbala do-o-o-o! Agbala ekeneo-o-o-o! Chi negbu madu ubosi ndu ya nato ya uto daluo-o-o!..." Ekwefi could already see the hills looming in the moonlight. They formed a circular ring with a break at one point through which the foot-track led to the centre of the circle. As soon as the priestess stepped into this ring of hills her voice was not only doubled in strength but was thrown back on all sides. It was indeed the shrine of a great god. Ekwefi picked her way carefully and quietly. She was already beginning to doubt the wisdom of her coming. Nothing would happen to Ezinma, she thought. And if anything happened to her could she stop it? She would not dare to enter the underground caves. Her coming was quite useless, she thought. As these things went through her mind she did not realise how close they were to the cave mouth. And so when the priestess with Ezinma on her back disappeared through a hole hardly big enough to pass a hen, Ekwefi broke into a run as though to stop them. As she stood gazing at the circular darkness which had swallowed them, tears gushed from her eyes, and she swore within her that if she heard Ezinma cry she would rush into the cave to defend her against all the gods in the world. She would die with her. Having sworn that oath, she sat down on a stony ledge and waited. Her fear had vanished. She could hear the priestess' voice, all its metal taken out of it by the vast emptiness of the cave. She buried her face in her lap and waited. She did not know how long she waited. It must have been a very long time. Her back was turned on the footpath that led out of the hills. She must have heard a noise behind her and turned round sharply. A man stood there with a machete in his hand. Ekwefi uttered a scream and sprang to her feet. "Don't be foolish," said Okonkwo's voice. "I thought you were going into the shrine with Chielo," he mocked. Ekwefi did not answer. Tears of gratitude filled her eyes. She knew her daughter was safe. "Go home and sleep," said Okonkwo. "I shah wait here." "I shall wait too. It is almost dawn. The first cock has crowed." As they stood there together, Ekwefi's mind went back to the days when they were young. She had married Anene because Okonkwo was too poor then to marry. Two years after her marriage to Anene she could bear it no longer and she ran away to Okonkwo. It had been early in the morning. The moon was shining. She was going to the stream to fetch water. Okonkwo's house was on the way to the stream. She went in and knocked at his door and he came out. Even in those days he was not a man of many words. He just carried her into his bed and in the darkness began to feel around her waist for the loose end of her cloth. CHAPTER TWELVE On the following morning the entire neighbourhood wore a festive air because Okonkwo's friend, Obierika, was celebrating his daughter's uri. It was the day on which her suitor (having already paid the greater part of her bride-price) would bring palm-wine not only to her parents and immediate relatives but to the wide and extensive group of kinsmen called umunna. Everybody had been invitedmen, women and children. But it was really a woman's ceremony and the central figures were the bride and her mother. As soon as day broke, breakfast was hastily eaten and women and children began to gather at Obierika's compound to help the bride's mother in her difficult but happy task of cooking for a whole village. Okonkwo's family was astir like any other family in the neighbourhood. Nwoye's mother and Okonkwo's youngest wife were ready to set out for Obierika's compound with ah their children. Nwoye's mother carried a basket of coco-yams, a cake of salt and smoked fish which she would present to Obierika's wife. Okonkwo's youngest wife, Ojiugo, also had a basket of plantains and coco-yams and a small pot of palm-oil. Their children carried pots of water. Ekwefi was tired and sleepy from the exhausting experiences of the previous night. It was not very long since they had returned. The priestess, with Ezinma sleeping on her back, had crawled out of the shrine on her belly like a snake. She had not as much as looked at Okonkwo and Ekwefi or shown any surprise at finding them at the mouth of the cave. She looked straight ahead of her and walked back to the village. Okonkwo and his wife followed at a respectful distance. They thought the priestess might be going to her house, but she went to Okonkwo's compound, passed through his obi and into Ekwefi's hut and walked into her bedroom. She placed Ezinma carefully on the bed and went away without saying a word to anybody. Ezinma was still sleeping when everyone else was astir, and Ekwefi asked Nwoye's mother and Ojiugo to explain to Obierika's wife that she would be late. She had got ready her basket of coco-yams and fish, but she must wait for Ezinma to wake. "You need some sleep yourself," said Nwoye's mother. "You look very tired." As they spoke Ezinma emerged from the hut, rubbing her eyes and stretching her spare frame. She saw the other children with their waterpots and remembered that they were going to fetch water for Obierika's wife. She went back to the hut and brought her pot. "Have you slept enough?" asked her mother. "Yes," she replied. "Let us go." "Not before you have had your breakfast," said Ekwefi. And she went into her hut to warm the vegetable soup she had cooked last night. "We shall be going," said Nwoye's mother. "I will tell Obierika's wife that you are coming later." And so they all went to help Obierika's wifeNwoye's mother with her four children and Ojiugo with her two. As they trooped through Okonkwo's obi he asked: "Who will prepare my afternoon meal?" "I shall return to do it," said Ojiugo. Okonkwo was also feeling tired, and sleepy, for although nobody else knew it, he had not slept at all last night. He had felt very anxious but did not show it. When Ekwefi had followed the priestess, he had allowed what he regarded as a reasonable and manly interval to pass and then gone with his machete to the shrine, where he thought they must be. It was only when he had got there that it had occurred to him that the priestess might have chosen to go round the villages first. Okonkwo had returned home and sat waiting. When he thought he had waited long enough he again returned to the shrine. But the Hills and the Caves were as silent as death. It was only on his fourth trip that he had found Ekwefi, and by then he had become gravely worried. Obierika's compound was as busy as an anthill. Temporary cooking tripods were erected on every available space by bringing together three blocks of sun-dried earth and making a fire in their midst. Cooking pots went up and down the tripods and foo-foo was pounded in a hundred wooden mortars Some of the women cooked the yams and the cassava, and others prepared vegetable soup. Young men pounded the foo-foo or split firewood. The children made endless trips to the stream. Three young men helped Obierika to slaughter the two goats with which the soup was made. They were very fat goats, but the fattest of all was tethered to a peg near the wall of the compound and was as big as a small cow. Obierika had sent one of his relatives all the way to Urnuike to buy that goat. It was the one he would present alive to his in-laws. "The market of Urnuike is a wonderful place," said the young man Who had been sent by Obierika to buy the giant goat "There are so many people on it that if you threw up a grain of sand it would not find a way to fall to earth again." "It is the result of a great medicine," said Obierika. "The people of Urnuike wanted their market to grow and swallow up the markets of their neighbours. So they made a powerful medicine. Every market day, before the first cock-crow, this medicine stands on the market ground in the shape of an old woman with a fan. With this magic fan she beckons to the market all the neighbouring clans. She beckons in front of her and behind her, to her right and to her left." "And so everybody comes," said another man, "honest men and thieves. They can steal your cloth from off your waist in that market." "Yes" said Obierika. "I warned Nwankwo to keep a shaip eye and a shaip ear. There was once a man who went to sell a goat. He led it on a thick rope which he tied round his wrist. But as he walked through the market he realised that people were pointing at him as they do to a madman. He could not understand it until he looked back and saw that what he led at the end of the tether was not a goat but a heavy log of wood." "Do you think a thief can do that kind of thing single-handed?" asked Nwankwo. "No," said Obierika. "They use medicine." When they had cut the goats' throats and collected the blood in a bowl, they held them over an open fire to burn off the hair, and the smell of burning hair blended with the smell of cooking. Then they washed them and cut them up for the women who prepared the soup. All this anthill activity was going smoothly when a sudden interruption came. It was a cry in the distance: oji odu aru ijiji-o-o! (The one that uses its tail to drive flies away!). Every woman immediately abandoned whatever she was doing and rushed out in the direction of the cry. "We cannot all rush out like that, leaving what we are cooking to burn in the fire," shouted Chielo, the priestess. "Three or four of us should stay behind." "It is true," said another woman. "We will allow three or four women to stay behind." Five women stayed behind to look after the cooking-pots, and all the rest rushed away to see the cow that had been let loose. When they saw it they drove it back to its owner, who at once paid the heavy fine which the village imposed on anyone whose cow was let loose on his neighbors' crops. When the women had exacted the penalty they checked among themselves to see if any woman had failed to come out when the cry had been raised. "Where is Mgbogo?" asked one of them. "She is ill in bed," said Mgbogo's next-door neighbour. "She has iba." "The only other person is Udenkwo," said another woman, "and her child is not twenty-eight days yet." Those women whom Obierika's wife had not asked to help her with the cooking returned to their homes, and the rest went back, in a body, to Obierika's compound. "Whose cow was it?" asked the women who had been allowed to stay behind. "It was my husband's," said Ezelagbo. "One of the young children had opened the gate of the cow-shed." Early in the afternoon the first two pots of palm-wine arrived from Obierika's in laws. They were duly presented to the women, who drank a cup or two each, to help them in their cooking. Some of it also went to the bride and her attendant maidens, who were putting the last delicate touches of razor to her coiffure and cam wood on her smooth skin. When the heat of the sun began to soften, Obierika's son, Maduka, took a long broom and swept the ground in front of his father's obi. And as if they had been waiting for that, Obierika's relatives and friends began to arrive, every man with his goatskin bag hung on one shoulder and a rolled goatskin mat under his arm. Some of them were accompanied by their sons bearing carved wooden stools. Okonkwo was one of them. They sat in a half-circle and began to talk of many things. It would not be long before the suitors came. Okonkwo brought out his snuff-bottle and offered it to Ogbuefi Ezenwa, who sat next to him. Ezenwa took it, tapped it on his kneecap, rubbed his left palm on his body to dry it before tipping a little snuff into it. His actions were deliberate, and he spoke as he performed them: "I hope our in-laws will bring many pots of wine. Although they come from a village that is known for being closefisted, they ought to know that Akueke is the bride for a king." "They dare not bring fewer than thirty pots," said Okonkwo. "I shall tell them my mind if they do." At that moment Obierika's son, Maduka, led out the giant goat from the inner compound, for his father's relatives to see. They all admired it and said that that was the way things should be done. The goat was then led back to the inner compound. Very soon after, the in-laws began to arrive. Young men and boys in single file, each carrying a pot of wine, came first. Obierika's relatives counted the pots as they came. Twenty, twenty-five. There was a long break, and the hosts looked at each other as if to say, "I told you." Then more pots came. Thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-five. The hosts nodded in approval and seemed to say, "Now they are behaving like men." Altogether there were fifty pots of wine. After the pot-bearers came Ibe, the suitor, and the elders of his family. They sat in a half-moon, thus completing a circle with their hosts. The pots of wine stood in their midst. Then the bride, her mother and half a dozen other women and girls emerged from the inner compound, and went round the circle shaking hands with all. The bride's mother led the way, followed by the bride and the other women. The married women wore their best cloths and the girls wore red and black waist-beads and anklets of brass. When the women retired, Obierika presented kola nuts to his in-laws. His eldest brother broke the first one. "Life to all of us," he said as he broke it. "And let there be friendship between your family and ours." The crowd answered-. "Ee-e-e!" "We are giving you our daughter today. She will be a good wife to you. She will bear you nine sons like the mother of our town." "Ee-e-e!" The oldest man in the camp of the visitors replied: "It will be good for you and it will be good for us." " Ee-e-e!" "This is not the first time my people have come to marry your daughter. My mother was one of you." "Ee-e-e!" "And this will not be the last, because you understand us and we understand you. You are a great family." "Ee-e-e!" "Prosperous men and great warriors." He looked in the direction of Okonkwo. "Your daughter will bear us sons like you. "Ee-e-e!" The kola was eaten and the drinking of palm-wine began. Groups of four or five men sat round with a pot in their midst. As the evening wore on, food was presented to the guests. There were huge bowls of foo-foo and steaming pots of soup. There were also pots of yam pottage. It was a great feast. As night fell, burning torches were set on wooden tripods and the young men raised a song. The elders sat in a big circle and the singers went round singing each man's praise as they came before him. They had something to say for every man. Some were great farmers, some were orators who spoke for the clan. Okonkwo was the greatest wrestler and warrior alive. When they had gone round the circle they settled down in the centre, and girls came from the inner compound to dance. At first the bride was not among them. But when she finally appeared holding a cock in her right hand, a loud cheer rose from the crowd. All the other dancers made way for her. She presented the cock to the musicians and began to dance. Her brass anklets rattled as she danced and her body gleamed with cam wood in the soft yellow light. The musicians with their wood, clay and metal instruments went from song to song. And they were all gay. They sang the latest song in the village: " If I hold her hand She says, 'Don't touch!' If I hold her foot She says, 'Don't touch! But when I hold her waist-beads she pretends not to know." The night was already far spent when the guests rose to go, taking their bride home to spend seven market weeks with her suitor's family. They sang songs as they went, and on their way they paid short courtesy visits to prominent men like Okonkwo, before they finally left for their village. Okonkwo made a present of two cocks to them. CHAPTER THIRTEEN Go-di-di-go-go-di-go. Di-go-go-di-go. It was the ekwe talking to the clan. One of the things every man learned was the language of the hollowed-out wooden instrument. Dum! Dum! Dum! boomed the cannon at intervals. The first cock had not crowed, and Umuofia was still swallowed up in sleep and silence when the ekwe began to talk, and the cannon shattered the silence. Men stirred on their bamboo beds and listened anxiously. Somebody was dead. The cannon seemed to rend the sky. Di-go-go-di-go-di-di-go-go floated in the message-laden night air. The faint and distant wailing of women settled like a sediment of sorrow on the earth. Now and again a full-chested lamentation rose above the wailing whenever a man came into the place of death. He raised his voice once or twice in manly sorrow and then sat down with the other men listening to the endless wailing of the women and the esoteric language of the ekwe. Now and again the cannon boomed. The wailing of the women would not be heard beyond the village, but the ekwe carried the news to all the nine villages and even beyond. It began by naming the clan: Umuofia obodo dike! "the land of the brave." Umuofia obodo dike! Umuofia obodo dike! It said this over and over again, and as it dwelt on it, anxiety mounted in every heart that heaved on a bamboo bed that night. Then it went nearer and named the village: "Iguedo of the yellow grinding-stone!" It was Okonkwo's village. Again and again Iguedo was called and men waited breathlessly in all the nine villages. At last the man was named and people sighed "E-u-u, Ezeudu is dead." A cold shiver ran down Okonkwo's back as he remembered the last time the old man had visited him. "That boy calls you father," he had said. "Bear no hand in his death." Ezeudu was a great man, and so all the clan was at his funeral. The ancient drums of death beat, guns and cannon were fired, and men dashed about in frenzy, cutting down every tree or animal they saw, jumping over walls and dancing on the roof. It was a warrior's funeral, and from morning till night warriors came and went in their age groups. They all wore smoked raffia skirts and their bodies were painted with chalk and charcoal. Now and again an ancestral spirit or egwugwu appeared from the underworld, speaking in a tremulous, unearthly voice and completely covered in raffia. Some of them were very violent, and there had been a mad rush for shelter earlier in the day when one appeared with a sharp machete and was only prevented from doing serious harm by two men who restrained him with the help of a strong rope tied round his waist. Sometimes he turned round and chased after those men, and they ran for their lives. But they always returned to the long rope he trailed behind. He sang, in a terrifying voice, that Ekwensu, or Evil Spirit, had entered his eye. But the most dreaded of all was yet to come. He was always alone and was shaped like a coffin. A sickly odour hung in the air wherever he went, and flies went with him. Even the greatest medicine men took shelter when he was near. Many years ago another egwugwu had dared to stand his ground before him and had been transfixed to the spot for two days. This one had only one hand and it carried a basket full of water. But some of the egwugwu were quite harmless. One of them was so old and infirm that he leaned heavily on a stick. He walked unsteadily to the place where the corpse was laid, gazed at it a while and went away againto the underworld. The land of the living was not far removed from the domain of the ancestors. There was coming and going between them, especially at festivals and also when an old man died, because an old man was very close to the ancestors. A man's life from birth to death was a series of transition rites which brought him nearer and nearer to his ancestors. Ezeudu had been the oldest man in his village, and at his death there were only three men in the whole clan who were older, and four or five others in his own age group. Whenever one of these ancient men appeared in the crowd to dance unsteadily the funeral steps of the tribe, younger men gave way and the tumult subsided. It was a great funeral, such as befitted a noble warrior. As the evening drew near, the shouting and the firing of guns, the beating of drums and the brandishing and clanging of machetes increased. Ezeudu had taken three titles in his life. It was a rare achievement. There were only four titles in the clan, and only one or two men in any generation ever achieved the fourth and highest. When they did, they became the lords of the land. Because he had taken titles, Ezeudu was to be buried after dark with only a glowing brand to light the sacred ceremony. But before this quiet and final rite, the tumult increased tenfold. Drums beat violently and men leaped up and down in frenzy. Guns were fired on all sides and sparks flew out as machetes clanged together in warriors' salutes. The air was full of dust and the smell of gunpowder. It was then that the one-handed spirit came, carrying a basket full of water. People made way for him on all sides and the noise subsided. Even the smell of gunpowder was swallowed in the sickly smell that now filled the air. He danced a few steps to the funeral drums and then went to see the corpse. "Ezeudu!" he called in his guttural voice. "If you had been poor in your last life I would have asked you to be rich when you come again. But you were rich. If you had been a coward, I would have asked you to bring courage. But you were a fearless warrior. If you had died young, I would have asked you to get life. But you lived long. So I shall ask you to come again the way you came before. If your death was the death of nature, go in peace. But if a man caused it, do not allow him a moment's rest." He danced a few more steps and went away. The drums and the dancing began again and reached fever- heat. Darkness was around the corner, and the burial was near. Guns fired the last salute and the cannon rent the sky. And then from the centre of the delirious fury came a cry of agony and shouts of horror. It was as if a spell had been cast. All was silent. In the centre of the crowd a boy lay in a pool of blood. It was the dead man's sixteen-year-old son, who with his brothers and half-brothers had been dancing the traditional farewell to their father. Okonkwo's gun had exploded and a piece of iron had pierced the boy's heart. The confusion that followed was without parallel in the tradition of Umuofia. Violent deaths were frequent, but nothing like this had ever happened. The only course open to Okonkwo was to flee from the clan. It was a crime against the earth goddess to kill a clansman, and a man who committed it must flee from the land. The crime was of two kinds, male and female. Okonkwo had committed the female, because it had been inadvertent. He could return to the clan after seven years. That night he collected his most valuable belongings into head-loads. His wives wept bitterly and their children wept with them without knowing why. Obierika and half a dozen other friends came to help and to console him. They each made nine or ten trips carrying Okonkwo's yams to store in Obierika's barn. And before the cock crowed Okonkwo and his family were fleeing to his motherland. It was a little village called Mbanta, just beyond the borders of Mbaino. As soon as the day broke, a large crowd of men from Ezeudu's quarter stormed Okonkwo's compound, dressed in garbs of war. They set fire to his houses, demolished his red walls, killed his animals and destroyed his barn. It was the justice of the earth goddess, and they were merely her messengers. They had no hatred in their hearts against Okonkwo. His greatest friend, Obierika, was among them. They were merely cleansing the land which Okonkwo had polluted with the blood of a clansman. Obierika was a man who thought about things. When the will of the goddess had been done, he sat down in his obi and mourned his friend's calamity. Why should a man suffer so grievously for an offence he had committed inadvertently? But although he thought for a long time he found no answer. He was merely led into greater complexities. He remembered his wife's twin children, whom he had thrown away. What crime had they committed? The Earth had decreed that they were an offence on the land and must be destroyed. And if the clan did not exact punishment for an offence against the great goddess, her wrath was loosed on all the land and not just on the offender. As the elders said, if one finger brought oil it soiled the others. PART TWO CHAPTER FOURTEEN Okonkwo was well received by his mother's kinsmen in Mbanta. The old man who received him was his mother's younger brother, who was now the eldest surviving member of that family. His name was Uchendu, and it was he who had received Okonkwo's mother twenty and ten years before when she had been brought home from Umuofia to be buried with her people. Okonkwo was only a boy then and Uchendu still remembered him crying the traditional farewell: "Mother, mother, mother is going." That was many years ago. Today Okonkwo was not bringing his mother home to be buried with her people. He was taking his family of three wives and their children to seek refuge in his motherland. As soon as Uchendu saw him with his sad and weary company he guessed what had happened, and asked no questions. It was not until the following day that Okonkwo told him the full story. The old man listened silently to the end and then said with some relief: "It is a female ochu." And he arranged the requisite rites and sacrifices. Okonkwo was given a plot of ground on which to build his compound, and two or three pieces of land on which to farm during the coming planting season. With the help of his mother's kinsmen he built himself an obi and three huts for his wives. He then installed his personal god and the symbols of his departed fathers. Each of Uchendu's five sons contributed three hundred seed-yams to enable their cousin to plant a farm, for as soon as the first rain came farming would begin. At last the rain came. It was sudden and tremendous. For two or three moons the sun had been gathering strength till it seemed to breathe a breath of fire on the earth. All the grass had long been scorched brown, and the sands felt like live coals to the feet. Evergreen trees wore a dusty coat of brown. The birds were silenced in the forests, and the world lay panting under the live, vibrating heat. And then came the clap of thunder. It was an angry, metallic and thirsty clap, unlike the deep and liquid rumbling of the rainy season. A mighty wind arose and filled the air with dust. Palm trees swayed as the wind combed their leaves into flying crests like strange and fantastic coiffure. When the rain finally came, it was in large, solid drops of frozen water which the people called "the nuts of the water of heaven." They were hard and painful on the body as they fell, yet young people ran about happily picking up the cold nuts and throwing them into their mouths to melt. The earth quickly came to life and the birds in the forests fluttered around and chirped merrily. A vague scent of life and green vegetation was diffused in the air. As the rain began to fall more soberly and in smaller liquid drops, children sought for shelter, and all were happy, refreshed and thankful. Okonkwo and his family worked very hard to plant a new farm. But it was like beginning life anew without the vigour and enthusiasm of youth, like learning to become left-handed in old age. Work no longer had for him the pleasure it used to have, and when there was no work to do he sat in a silent half-sleep. His life had been ruled by a great passionto become one of the lords of the clan. That had been his life-spring. And he had all but achieved it. Then everything had been broken. He had been cast out of his clan like a fish onto a dry, sandy beach, panting. Clearly his personal god or chi was not made for great things. A man could not rise beyond the destiny of his chi. The saying of the elders was not truethat if a man said yea his chi also affirmed. Here was a man whose chi said nay despite his own affirmation. The old man, Uchendu, saw clearly that Okonkwo had yielded to despair and he was greatly troubled. He would speak to him after the isa-ifi ceremony. The youngest of Uchendu's five sons, Amikwu, was marrying a new wife. The bride-price had been paid and all but the last ceremony had been performed. Amikwu and his people had taken palm-wine to the bride's kinsmen about two moons before Okonkwo's arrival in Mbanta. And so it was time for the final ceremony of confession. The daughters of the family were all there, some of them having come a long way from their homes in distant villages. Uchendu's eldest daughter had come from Obodo, nearly half a day's journey away. The daughters of Uehuiona were also there. It was a full gathering of umuada, in the same way as they would meet if a death occurred. There were twenty-two of them. They sat in a big circle on the ground and the young bride in the centre with a hen in her right hand. Uchendu before her, holding the ancestral staff of the family. The men stood outside the circle, watching. Their wives also. It was evening and the sun was setting. Uchendu's eldest daughter, Njide, asked her, "Remember that if you do not answer truthfully you will suffer or even die at childbirth," she began. "How man men have lain with you since my brother first expressed his desire to marry you?" "None," she answered simply. "Answer truthfully," urged the other women. "None?" asked Njide. "None," she answered. "Swear on this staff of my fathers," said Uchendu. "I swear," said the bride. Uchendu took the hen from her, slit its throat with a sharp knife and allowed some of the blood to fall on the ancestral staff. From that day Amikwu took the young bride and she became his wife. The daughters of the clan did not return to their homes immediately but spent two more days with their kinsmen. On the second day Uchendu called together his sons and daughters and his nephew, Okonkwo. The men brought their goatskin mats, with which they sat on the floor, and the women sat on a sisal mat spread on a raised bank of earth. Uchendu pulled gently at his grey beard and gnashed his teeth. Then he began to speak, quietly and deliberately, picking his words with great care: "It is Okonkwo that I primarily wish to speak to," he began. "But I want all of you to note what I am going to say. I am an old man and you are all children. I know more about the world than any of you. If there is any one among you who thinks he knows more let him speak up." He paused, but no one spoke. "Why is Okonkwo with us today? This is not his clan. We are only his mother's kinsmen. He does not belong here. He is an exile, condemned for seven years to live in a strange land. And so he is bowed with grief. But there is just one question I would like to ask him. Can you tell me, Okonkwo, why it is that one of the commonest names we give our children is Nneka, or "Mother is Supreme?" We all know that a man is the head of the family and his wives do his bidding. A child belongs to its father and his family and not to its mother and her family. A man belongs to his fatherland and not to his motherland. And yet we say Nneka -'Mother is Supreme.' Why is that?" There was silence. "I want Okonkwo to answer me," said Uchendu. "I do not know the answer," Okonkwo replied. "You do not know the answer? So you see that you are a child. You have many wives and many childrenmore children than I have. You are a great man in your clan. But you are still a child, my child. Listen to me and I shall tell you. But there is one more question I shall ask you. Why is it that when a woman dies she is taken home to be buried with her own kinsmen? She is not buried with her husband's kinsmen. Why is that? Your mother was brought home to me and buried with my people. Why was that?" Okonkwo shook his head. "He does not know that either," said Uchendu, "and yet he is full of sorrow because he has come to live in his motherland for a few years." He laughed a mirthless laughter, and turned to his sons and daughters. "What about you? Can you answer my question?" They all shook their heads. "Then listen to me," he said and cleared his throat. "It's true that a child belongs to its father. But when a father beats his child, it seeks sympathy in its mother's hut. A man belongs to his fatherland when things are good and life is sweet. But when there is sorrow and bitterness he finds refuge in his motherland. Your mother is there to protect you. She is buried there. And that is why we say that mother is supreme. Is it right that you, Okonkwo, should bring to your mother a heavy face and refuse to be comforted? Be careful or you may displease the dead. Your duty is to comfort your wives and children and take them back to your fatherland after seven years. But if you allow sorrow to weigh you down and kill you they will all die in exile." He paused for a long while. "These are now your kinsmen." He waved at his sons and daughters. "You think you are the greatest sufferer in the world? Do you know that men are sometimes banished for life? Do you know that men sometimes lose all their yams and even their children? I had six wives once. I have none now except that young girl who knows not her right from her left. Do you know how many children I have buried children I begot in my youth and strength? Twenty-two. I did not hang myself, and I am still alive. If you think you are the greatest sufferer in the world ask my daughter, Akueni, how many twins she has borne and thrown away. Have you not heard the song they sing when a woman dies? "'For whom is it well, for whom is it well? There is no one for whom it is well.' "I have no more to say to you." CHAPTER FIFTEEN It was in the second year of Okonkwo's exile that his friend, Obierika, came to visit him. He brought with him two young men, each of them carrying a heavy bag on his head. Okonkwo helped them put down their loads. It was clear that the bags were full of cowries. Okonkwo was very happy to receive his friend. His wives and children were very happy too, and so were his cousins and their wives when he sent for them and told them who his guest was. "You must take him to salute our father," said one of the cousins. "Yes," replied Okonkwo. "We are going directly." But before they went he whispered something to his first wife. She nodded, and soon the children were chasing one of their cocks. Uchendu had been told by one of his grandchildren that three strangers had come to Okonkwo's house. He was therefore waiting to receive them. He held out his hands to them when they came into his obi, and after they had shaken hands he asked Okonkwo who they were. "This is Obierika, my great friend. I have already spoken to you about him." "Yes," said the old man, turning to Obierika. "My son has told me about you, and I am happy you have come to see us. I knew your father, Iweka. He was a great man. He had many friends here and came to see them quite often. Those were good days when a man had friends in distant clans. Your generation does not know that. You stay at home, afraid of your next-door neighbour. Even a man's motherland is strange to him nowadays." He looked at Okonkwo. "I am an old man and I like to talk. That is all I am good for now." He got up painfully, went into an inner room and came back with a kola nut. "Who are the young men with you?" he asked as he sat down again on his goatskin. Okonkwo told him. "Ah," he said. "Welcome, my sons." He presented the kola nut to them, and when they had seen it and thanked him, he broke it and they ate. "Go into that room," he said to Okonkwo, pointing with his finger. "You will find a pot of wine there." Okonkwo brought the wine and they began to drink. It was a day old, and very strong. "Yes," said Uchendu after a long silence. "People travelled more in those days. There is not a single clan in these parts that I do not know very well. Aninta, Umuazu, Ikeocha, Elumelu, AbameI know them all." "Have you heard," asked Obierika, "that Abame is no more?" "How is that?" asked Uchendu and Okonkwo together. "Abame has been wiped out," said Obierika. "It is a strange and terrible story. If I had not seen the few survivors with my own eyes and heard their story with my own ears, I would not have believed. Was it not on an Eke day that they fled into Umuofia?" he asked his two companions, and they nodded their heads. "Three moons ago," said Obierika, "on an Eke market day a little band of fugitives came into our town. Most of them were sons of our land whose mothers had been buried with us. But there were some too who came because they had friends in our town, and others who could think of nowhere else open to escape. And so they fled into Umuofia with a woeful story." He drank his palm-wine, and Okonkwo filled his horn again. He continued: "During the last planting season a white man had appeared in their clan." "An albino," suggested Okonkwo. "He was not an albino. He was quite different." He sipped his wine. "And he was riding an iron horse. The first people who saw him ran away, but he stood beckoning to them. In the end the fearless ones went near and even touched him. The elders consulted their Oracle and it told them that the strange man would break their clan and spread destruction among them." Obierika again drank a little of his wine. "And so they killed the white man and tied his iron horse to their sacred tree because it looked as if it would run away to call the man's friends. I forgot to tell you another thing which the Oracle said. It said that other white men were on their way. They were locusts, it said, and that first man was their harbinger sent to explore the terrain. And so they killed him." "What did the white man say before they killed him?" asked Uchendu. "He said nothing," answered one of Obierika's companions. "He said something, only they did not understand him," said Obierika. "He seemed to speak through his nose." "One of the men told me," said Obierika's other companion, "that he repeated over and over again a word that resembled Mbaino. Perhaps he had been going to Mbaino and had lost his way." "Anyway," resumed Obierika, "they killed him and tied up his iron horse. This was before the planting season began. For a long time nothing happened. The rains had come and yams had been sown. The iron horse was still tied to the sacred silk-cotton tree. And then one morning three white men led by a band of ordinary men like us came to the clan. They saw the iron horse and went away again. Most of the men and women of Abame had gone to their farms. Only a few of them saw these white men and their followers. For many market weeks nothing else happened. They have a big market in Abame on every other Afo day and, as you know, the whole clan gathers there. That was the day it happened. The three white men and a very large number of other men surrounded the market. They must have used a powerful medicine to make themselves invisible until the market was full. And they began to shoot. Everybody was killed, except the old and the sick who were at home and a handful of men and women whose chi were wide awake and brought them out of that market." He paused. "Their clan is now completely empty. Even the sacred fish in their mysterious lake have fled and the lake has turned the colour of blood. A great evil has come upon their land as the Oracle had warned." There was a long silence. Uchendu ground his teeth together audibly. Then he burst out: "Never kill a man who says nothing. Those men of Abame were fools. What did they know about the man?" He ground his teeth again and told a story to illustrate his point. "Mother Kite once sent her daughter to bring food. She went, and brought back a duckling. 'You have done very well,' said Mother Kite to her daughter, 'but tell me, what did the mother of this duckling say when you swooped and carried its child away?' 'It said nothing,' replied the young kite. 'It just walked away.' 'You must return the duckling,' said Mother Kite. 'There is something ominous behind the silence.' And so Daughter Kite returned the duckling and took a chick instead. 'What did the mother of this chick do?' asked the old kite. 'It cried and raved and cursed me,' said the young kite. 'Then we can eat the chick,' said her mother. 'There is nothing to fear from someone who shouts.' Those men of Abame were fools." "They were fools," said Okonkwo after a pause. "They had been warned that danger was ahead. They should have armed themselves with their guns and their machetes even when they went to market." "They have paid for their foolishness," said Obierika, "But I am greatly afraid. We have heard stories about white men who made the powerful guns and the strong drinks and took slaves away across the seas, but no one thought the stories were true." "There is no story that is not true," said Uchendu. "The world has no end, and what is good among one people is an abomination with others. We have albinos among us. Do you not think that they came to our clan by mistake, that they have strayed from their way to a land where everybody is like them?" Okonkwo's first wife soon finished her cooking and set before their guests a big meal of pounded yams and bitter-leaf soup. Okonkwo's son, Nwoye, brought in a pot of sweet wine tapped from the raffia palm. "You are a big man now," Obierika said to Nwoye. "Your friend Anene asked me to greet you." "Is he well?" asked Nwoye. "We are all well," said Obierika. Ezinma brought them a bowl of water with which to wash their hands. After that they began to eat and to drink the wine. "When did you set out from home?" asked Okonkwo. "We had meant to set out from my house before cockcrow," said Obierika. "But Nweke did not appear until it was quite light. Never make an early morning appointment with a man who has just married a new wife." They all laughed. "Has Nweke married a wife?" asked Okonkwo. "He has married Okadigbo's second daughter," said Obierika. "That is very good," said Okonkwo. "I do not blame you for not hearing the cock crow." When they had eaten, Obierika pointed at the two heavy bags. "That is the money from your yams," he said. "I sold the big ones as soon as you left. Later on I sold some of the seed-yams and gave out others to sharecroppers. I shall do that every year until you return. But I thought you would need the money now and so I brought it. Who knows what may happen tomorrow? Perhaps green men will come to our clan and shoot us." "God will not permit it," said Okonkwo. "I do not know how to thank you." "I can tell you," said Obierika. "Kill one of your sons for me. "That will not be enough," said Okonkwo. "Then kill yourself," said Obierika. "Forgive me," said Okonkwo, smiling. "I shall not talk about thanking you any more." CHAPTER SIXTEEN When nearly two years later Obierika paid another visit to his friend in exile the circumstances were less happy. The missionaries had come to Umuofia. They had built their church there, won a handful of converts and were already sending evangelists to the surrounding towns and villages. That was a source of great sorrow to the leaders of the clan, but many of them believed that the strange faith and the white man's god would not last. None of his converts was a man whose word was heeded in the assembly of the people. None of them was a man of title. They were mostly the kind of people that were called efulefu, worthless, empty men. The imagery of an efulefu in the language of the clan was a man who sold his machete and wore the sheath to battle. Chielo, the priestess of Agbala, called the converts the excrement of the clan, and the new faith was a mad dog that had come to eat it up. What moved Obierika to visit Okonkwo was the sudden appearance of the latter's son, Nwoye, among the missionaries in Umuofia. "What are you doing here?" Obierika had asked when after many difficulties the missionaries had allowed him to speak to the boy. "I am one of them," replied Nwoye. "How is your father?" Obierika asked, not knowing what else to say. "I don't know. He is not my father," said Nwoye, unhappily. And so Obierika went to Mbanta to see his friend. And he found that Okonkwo did not wish to speak about Nwoye. It was only from Nwoye's mother that he heard scraps of the story. The arrival of the missionaries had caused a considerable stir in the village of Mbanta. There were six of them and one was a white man. Every man and woman came out to see the white man. Stories about these strange men had grown since one of them had been killed in Abame and his iron horse tied to the sacred silk-cotton tree. And so everybody came to see the white man. It was the time of the year when everybody was at home. The harvest was over. When they had all gathered, the white man began to speak to them. He spoke through an interpreter who was an Ibo man, though his dialect was different and harsh to the ears of Mbanta. Many people laughed at his dialect and the way he used words strangely. Instead of saying "myself" he always said "my buttocks." But he was a man of commanding presence and the clansmen listened to him. He said he was one of them, they could see from his colour and his language. The other four black men were also their brothers, although one of them did not speak Ibo. The white man was also their brother because they were all sons of God. And he told them about this new God, the Creator of all the world and all the men and women. He told them that they worshipped false gods, gods of wood and stone. A deep murmur went through the crowd when he said this. He told them that the true God lived on high and that all men when they died went before Him for judgment. Evil men and all the heathen who in their blindness bowed to wood and stone were thrown into a fire that burned like palm-oil. But good men who worshipped the true God lived forever in His happy kingdom. "We have been sent by this great God to ask you to leave your wicked ways and false gods and turn to Him so that you may be saved when you die," he said. "Your buttocks understand our language," said someone light-heartedly and the crowd laughed. "What did he say?" the white man asked his interpreter. But before he could answer, another man asked a question: "Where is the white man's horse?" he asked. The Ibo evangelists consulted among themselves and decided that the man probably meant bicycle. They told the white man and he smiled benevolently. "Tell them," he said, "that I shall bring many iron horses when we have settled down among them. Some of them will even ride the iron horse themselves." This was interpreted to them but very few of them heard. They were talking excitedly among themselves because the white man had said he was going to live among them. They had not thought about that. At this point an old man said he had a question. "Which is this god of yours," he asked, "the goddess of the earth, the god of the sky, Amadiora or the thunderbolt, or what?" The interpreter spoke to the white man and he immediately gave his answer. "All the gods you have named are not gods at all. They are gods of deceit who tell you to kill your fellows and destroy innocent children. There is only one true God and He has the earth, the sky, you and me and all of us." "If we leave our gods and follow your god," asked another man, "who will protect us from the anger of our neglected gods and ancestors?" "Your gods are not alive and cannot do you any harm," replied the white man. "They are pieces of wood and stone." When this was interpreted to the men of Mbanta they broke into derisive laughter. These men must be mad, they said to themselves. How else could they say that Ani and Amadiora were harmless? And Idemili and Ogwugwu too? And some of them began to go away. Then the missionaries burst into song. It was one of those gay and rollicking tunes of evangelism which had the power of plucking at silent and dusty chords in the heart of an Ibo man. The interpreter explained each verse to the audience, some of whom now stood enthralled. It was a story of brothers who lived in darkness and in fear, ignorant of the love of God. It told of one sheep out on the hills, away from the gates of God and from the tender shepherd's care. After the singing the interpreter spoke about the Son of God whose name was Jesu Kristi. Okonkwo, who only stayed in the hope that it might come to chasing the men out of the village or whipping them, now said "You told us with your own mouth that there was only one god. Now you talk about his son. He must have a wife, then." The crowd agreed. "I did not say He had a wife," said the interpreter, somewhat lamely. "Your buttocks said he had a son," said the joker. "So he must have a wife and all of them must have buttocks." The missionary ignored him and went on to talk about the Holy Trinity. At the end of it Okonkwo was fully convinced that the man was mad. He shrugged his shoulders and went away to tap his afternoon palm-wine. But there was a young lad who had been captivated. His name was Nwoye, Okonkwo's first son. It was not the mad logic of the Trinity that captivated him. He did not understand it. It was the poetry of the new religion, something felt in the marrow. The hymn about brothers who sat in darkness and in fear seemed to answer a vague and persistent question that haunted his young soulthe question of the twins crying in the bush and the question of Ikemefuna who was killed. He felt a relief within as the hymn poured into his parched soul. The words of the hymn were like the drops of frozen rain melting on the dry palate of the panting earth. Nwoye's callow mind was greatly puzzled. CHAPTER SEVENTEEN The missionaries spent their first four or five nights in the marketplace, and went into the village in the morning to preach the gospel. They asked who the king of the village was, but the villagers told them that there was no king. "We have men of high title and the chief priests and the elders," they said. It was not very easy getting the men of high title and the elders together after the excitement of the first day. But the arrivees persevered, and in the end they were received by them They asked for a plot of land to build on, An evil forest was where the clan buried all those who died of the really evil diseases, like leprosy and smallpox. It was also the dumping ground for highly potent fetishes of great medicine men when they died. An evil forest was, therefore, alive with sinister forces and powers of darkness. It was such a forest that, the rulers of Mbanta gave to the missionaries. They did not really want them near to the clan, and so they made them that offer which nobody in his right senses would accept. "They want a piece of land to build their shrine," said Uchendu to his peers when they consulted among themselves. "We shall give them a piece of land." He paused, and there was a murmur of surprise and disagreement. "Let us give them a portion of the Evil Forest. They boast about victory over death. Let us give them a real battlefield in which to show their victory." They laughed and agreed, and sent for the missionaries, whom they had asked to leave them for a while so that they might "whisper together." They offered them as much of the Evil Forest as they cared to take. And to their greatest amazement the missionaries thanked them and burst into song. "They do not understand," said some of the elders. "But they will understand when they go to their plot of land tomorrow morning." And they dispersed. The next morning the crazy men actually began to clear a part of the forest and to build their house. The inhabitants of Mbanta expected them all to be dead within four days. The first day passed and the second and third and fourth, and none of them died. Everyone was puzzled. And then it became known that the white man's fetish had unbelievable power. It was said that he wore glasses on his eyes so that he could see and talk to evil spirits. Not long after, he won his first three converts. Although Nwoye had been attracted to the new faith from the very first day, he kept it secret. He dared not go too near the missionaries for fear of his father. But whenever they came to preach in the open marketplace or the village play ground, Nwoye was there. And he was already beginning to know some of the simple stories they told. "We have now built a church," said Mr. Kiaga, the interpreter, who was now in charge of the infant congregation. The white man had gone back to Umuofia, where he built his headquarters and from where he paid regular visits to Mr. Kiaga's congregation at Mbanta. "We have now built a church," said Mr. Kiaga, "and we want you all to come in every seventh day to worship the true God." On the following Sunday, Nwoye passed and repassed the little red-earth and thatch building without summoning enough courage to enter. He heard the voice of singing and although it came from a handful of men it was loud and confident. Their church stood on a circular clearing that looked like the open mouth of the Evil Forest. Was it waiting to snap its teeth together? After passing and re-passing by the church, Nwoye returned home. It was well known among the people of Mbanta that their gods and ancestors were sometimes long-suffering and would deliberately allow a man to go on defying them. But even in such cases they set their limit at seven market weeks or twenty-eight days. Beyond that limit no man was suffered to go. And so excitement mounted in the village as the seventh week approached since the impudent missionaries built their church in the Evil Forest. The villagers were so certain about the doom that awaited these men that one or two converts thought it wise to suspend their allegiance to the new faith. At last the day came by which all the missionaries should have died. But they were still alive, building a new red-earth and thatch house for their teacher, Mr. Kiaga. That week they won a handful more converts. And for the first time they had a woman. Her name was Nneka, the wife of Amadi, who was a prosperous farmer. She was very heavy with child. Nneka had had four previous pregnancies and child-births. But each time she had borne twins, and they had been immediately thrown away. Her husband and his family were already becoming highly critical of such a woman and were not unduly perturbed when they found she had fled to join the Christians. It was a good riddance. One morning Okonkwo's cousin, Amikwu, was passing by the church on his way from the neighbouring village, when he saw Nwoye among the Christians. He was greatly surprised, and when he got home he went straight to Okonkwo's hut and told him what he had seen. The women began to talk excitedly, but Okonkwo sat unmoved. It was late afternoon before Nwoye returned. He went into the obi and saluted his father, but he did not answer. Nwoye turned round to walk into the inner compound when his father, suddenly overcome with fury, sprang to his feet and gripped him by the neck. "Where have you been?" he stammered. Nwoye struggled to free himself from the choking grip. "Answer me," roared Okonkwo, "before I kill you!" He seized a heavy stick that lay on the dwarf wall and hit him two or three savage blows. "Answer me!" he roared again. Nwoye stood looking at him and did not say a word. The women were screaming outside, afraid to go in. "Leave that boy at once!" said a voice in the outer compound. It was Okonkwo's uncle, Uchendu. "Are you mad?" Okonkwo did not answer. But he left hold of Nwoye, who walked away and never returned. He went back to the church and told Mr. Kiaga that he had decided to go to Umuofia where the white missionary had set up a school to teach young Christians to read and write. Mr. Kiaga's joy was very great. "Blessed is he who forsakes his father and his mother for my sake," he intoned. "Those that hear my words are my father and my mother." Nwoye did not fully understand. But he was happy to leave his father. He would return later to his mother and his brothers and sisters and convert them to the new faith. As Okonkwo sat in his hut that night, gazing into a log fire, he thought over the matter. A sudden fury rose within him and he felt a strong desire to take up his machete, go to the church and wipe out the entire vile and miscreant gang. But on further thought he told himself that Nwoye was not worth fighting for. Why, he cried in his heart, should he, Okonkwo, of all people, be cursed with such a son? He saw clearly in it the finger of his personal god or chi. For how else could he explain his great misfortune and exile and now his despicable son's behaviour? Now that he had time to think of it, his son's crime stood out in its stark enormity. To abandon the gods of one's father and go about with a lot of effeminate men clucking like old hens was the very depth of abomination. Suppose when he died all his male children decided to follow Nwoye's steps and abandon their ancestors? Okonkwo felt a cold shudder run through him at the terrible prospect, like the prospect of annihilation. He saw himself and his fathers crowding round their ancestral shrine waiting in vain for worship and sacrifice and finding nothing but ashes of bygone days, and his children the while praying to the white man's god. If such a thing were ever to happen, he, Okonkwo, would wipe them off the face of the earth. Okonkwo was popularly called the "Roaring Flame." As he looked into the log fire he recalled the name. He was a flaming fire. How then could he have begotten a son like Nwoye, degenerate and effeminate? Perhaps he was not his son. No! he could not be. His wife had played him false. He would teach her! But Nwoye resembled his grandfather, Unoka, who was Okonkwo's father. He pushed the thought out of his mind. He, Okonkwo, was called a flaming fire. How could he have begotten a woman for a son? At Nwoye's age Okonkwo had already become famous throughout Umuofia for his wrestling and his fearlessness. He sighed heavily, and as if in sympathy the smouldering log also sighed. And immediately Okonkwo's eyes were opened and he saw the whole matter clearly. Living fire begets cold, impotent ash. He sighed again, deeply. CHAPTER EIGHTEEN The young church in Mbanta had a few crises early in its life. At first the clan had assumed that it would not survive. But it had gone on living and gradually becoming stronger. The clan was worried, but not overmuch. If a gang of efulefu decided to live in the Evil Forest it was their own affair. When one came to think of it, the Evil Forest was a fit home for such undesirable people. It was true they were rescuing twins from the bush, but they never brought them into the village. As far as the villagers were concerned, the twins still remained where they had been thrown away. Surely the earth goddess would not visit the sins of the missionaries on the innocent villagers? But on one occasion the missionaries had tried to over step the bounds. Three converts had gone into the village and boasted openly that all the gods were dead and impotent and that they were prepared to defy them by burning all their shrines. "Go and burn your mothers' genitals," said one of the priests. The men were seized and beaten until they streamed with blood. After that nothing happened for a long time between the church and the clan. But stories were already gaining ground that the white man had not only brought a religion but also a government. It was said that they had built a place of judgment in Umuofia to protect the followers of their religion. It was even said that they had hanged one man who killed a missionary. Although such stories were now often told they looked like fairytales in Mbanta and did not as yet affect the relationship between the new church and the clan. There was no question of killing a missionary here, for Mr. Kiaga, despite his madness, was quite harmless. As for his converts, no one could kill them without having to flee from the clan, for in spite of their worthlessness they still belonged to the clan. And so nobody gave serious thought to the stories about the white man's government or the consequences of killing the Christians. If they became more troublesome than they already were they would simply be driven out of the clan. And the little church was at that moment too deeply absorbed in its own troubles to annoy the clan. It all began over the question of admitting outcasts. These outcasts, or osu, seeing that the new religion welcomed twins and such abominations, thought that it was possible that they would also be received. And so one Sunday two of them went into the church. There was an immediate stir, but so great was the work the new religion had done among the converts that they did not immediately leave the church when the outcasts came in. Those who found themselves nearest to them merely moved to another seat. It was a miracle. But it only lasted till the end of the service. The whole church raised a protest and was about to drive these people out, when Mr. Kiaga stopped them and began to explain. "Before God," he said, "there is no slave or free. We are all children of God and we must receive these our brothers." "You do not understand," said one of the converts. "What will the heathen say of us when they hear that we receive osu into our midst? They will laugh." "Let them laugh," said Mr. Kiaga. "God will laugh at them on the judgment day. Why do the nations rage and the peoples imagine a vain thing? He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh. The Lord shall have them in derision." "You do not understand," the convert maintained. "You are our teacher, and you can teach us the things of the new faith. But this is a matter which we know." And he told him what an osu was. He was a person dedicated to a god, a thing set aparta taboo for ever, and his children after him. He could neither marry nor be married by the free-born. He was in fact an outcast, living in a special area of the village, close to the Great Shrine. Wherever he went he carried with him the mark of his forbidden castelong, tangled and dirty hair. A razor was taboo to him. An osu could not attend an assembly of the free-born, and they, in turn, could not shelter under his roof. He could not take any of the four titles of the clan, and when he died he was buried by his kind in the Evil Forest. How could such a man be a follower of Christ? "He needs Christ more than you and I," said Mr. Kiaga. "Then I shall go back to the clan," said the convert. And he went. Mr. Kiaga stood firm, and it was his firmness that saved the young church. The wavering converts drew inspiration and confidence from his unshakable faith. He ordered the outcasts to shave off their long, tangled hair. At first they were afraid they might die. "Unless you shave off the mark of your heathen belief I will not admit you into the church," said Mr. Kiaga. "You fear that you will die. Why should that be? How are you different from other men who shave their hair? The same God created you and them. But they have cast you out like lepers. It is against the will of God, who has promised everlasting life to all who believe in His holy name. The heathen say you will die if you do this or that, and you are afraid. They also said I would die if I built my church on this ground. Am I dead? They said I would die if I took care of twins. I am still alive. The heathen speak nothing but falsehood. Only the word of our God is true." The two outcasts shaved off their hair, and soon they were the strongest adherents of the new faith. And what was more, nearly all the osu in Mbanta followed their example. It was in fact one of them who in his zeal brought the church into serious conflict with the clan a year later by killing the sacred python, the emanation of the god of water. The royal python was the most revered animal in Mbanta and all the surrounding clans. It was addressed as "Our Father," and was allowed to go wherever it chose, even into people's beds. It ate rats in the house and sometimes swallowed hens' eggs. If a clansman killed a royal python accidentally, he made sacrifices of atonement and performed an expensive burial ceremony such as was done for a great man. No punishment was prescribed for a man who killed the python knowingly. Nobody thought that such a thing could ever happen. Perhaps it never did happen. That was the way the clan at first looked at it. No one had actually seen the man do it. The story had arisen among the Christians themselves. But, all the same, the rulers and elders of Mbanta assembled to decide on their action. Many of them spoke at great length and in fury. The spirit of wars was upon them. Okonkwo, who had begun to play a part in the affairs of his motherland, said that until the abominable gang was chased out of the village with whips there would be no peace. But there were many others who saw the situation differently, and it was their counsel that prevailed in the end. "It is not our custom to fight for our gods," said one of them. "Let us not presume to do so now. If a man kills the sacred python in the secrecy of his hut, the matter lies between him and the god. We did not see it. If we put ourselves between the god and his victim we may receive blows intended for the offender. When a man blasphemes, what do we do? Do we go and stop his mouth? No. We put our fingers into our ears to stop us hearing. That is a wise action." "Let us not reason like cowards," said Okonkwo. "If a man comes into my hut and defecates on the floor, what do I do? Do I shut my eyes? No! I take a stick and break his head That is what a man does. These people are daily pouring filth over us, and Okeke says we should pretend not to see." Okonkwo made a sound full of disgust. This was a womanly clan, he thought. Such a thing could never happen in his fatherland, Umuofia. "Okonkwo has spoken the truth," said another man. "We should do something. But let us ostracise these men. We would then not be held accountable for their abominations." Everybody in the assembly spoke, and in the end it was decided to ostracise the Christians. Okonkwo ground his teeth in disgust. That night a bellman went through the length and breadth of Mbanta proclaiming that the adherents of the new faith were thenceforth excluded from the life and privileges of the clan. The Christians had grown in number and were now a small community of men, women and children, self-assured and confident. Mr. Brown, the white missionary, paid regular visits to them. "When I think that it is only eighteen months since the Seed was first sown among you," he said, "I marvel at what the Lord hath wrought." It was Wednesday in Holy Week and Mr. Kiaga had asked the women to bring red earth and white chalk and water to scrub the church for Easter, and the women had formed themselves into three groups for this purpose. They set out early that morning, some of them with their waterpots to the stream, another group with hoes and baskets to the village earth pit, and the others to the chalk quarry. Mr. Kiaga was praying in the church when he heard the women talking excitedly. He rounded off his prayer and went to see what it was all about. The women had come to the church with empty waterpots. They said that some young men had chased them away from the stream with whips. Soon after, the women who had gone for red earth returned with empty baskets. Some of them had been heavily whipped. The chalk women also returned to tell a similar story. "What does it all mean?" asked Mr. Kiaga, who was greatly perplexed. "The village has outlawed us," said one of the women. "The bellman announced it last night. But it is not our custom to debar anyone from the stream or the quarry." Another woman said, "They want to ruin us. They will not allow us into the markets. They have said so." Mr. Kiaga was going to send into the village for his men-converts when he saw them coming on their own. Of course they had all heard the bellman, but they had never in all their lives heard of women being debarred from the stream. "Come along," they said to the women. "We will go with you to meet those cowards." Some of them had big sticks and some even machetes. But Mr. Kiaga restrained them. He wanted first to know why they had been outlawed. "They say that Okoli killed the sacred python," said one man. "It is false," said another. "Okoli told me himself that it was false." Okoli was not there to answer. He had fallen ill on the previous night. Before the day was over he was dead. His death showed that the gods were still able to fight their own battles. The clan saw no reason then for molesting the Christians. CHAPTER NINETEEN The last big rains of the year were falling. It was the time for treading red earth with which to build walls. It was not done earlier because the rains were too heavy and would have washed away the heap of trodden earth, and it could not be done later because harvesting would soon set in, and after that the dry season. It was going to be Okonkwo's last harvest in Mbanta. The seven wasted and weary years were at last dragging to a close. Although he had prospered in his motherland Okonkwo knew that he would have prospered even more in Umuofia, in the land of his fathers where men were bold and warlike. In these seven years he would have climbed to the utmost heights. And so he regretted every day of his exile. His mother's kinsmen had been very kind to him, and he was grateful. But that did not alter the facts. He had called the first child born to him in exile Nneka "Mother is Supreme"out of politeness to his mother's kinsmen. But two years later when a son was born he called him Nwofia "Begotten in the Wilderness." As soon as he entered his last year in exile Okonkwo sent money to Obierika to build him two huts in his old compound where he and his family would live until he built more huts and the outside wall of his compound. He could not ask another man to build his own obi for him, nor the walls of his compound. Those things a man built for himself or inherited from his father. As the last heavy rains of the year began to fall, Obierika sent word that the two huts had been built and Okonkwo began to prepare for his return, after the rains. He would have liked to return earlier and build his compound that year before the rains stopped, but in doing so he would have taken something from the full penalty of seven years. And that could not be. So he waited impatiently for the dry season to come. It came slowly. The rain became lighter and lighter until it fell in slanting showers. Sometimes the sun shone through the rain and a light breeze blew. It was a gay and airy kind of rain. The rainbow began to appear, and sometimes two rainbows, like a mother and her daughter, the one young and beautiful, and the other an old and faint shadow. The rainbow was called the python of the sky. Okonkwo called his three wives and told them to get things together for a great feast. "I must thank my mother's kinsmen before I go," he said. Ekwefi still had some cassava left on her farm from the previous year. Neither of the other wives had. It was not that they had been lazy, but that they had many children to feed. It was therefore understood that Ekwefi would provide cassava for the feast. Nwoye's mother and Ojiugo would provide the other things like smoked fish, palm-oil and pepper for the soup. Okonkwo would take care of meat and yams. Ekwefi rose early on the following morning and went to her farm with her daughter, Ezinma, and Ojiugo's daughter, Obiageli, to harvest cassava tubers. Each of them carried a long cane basket, a machete for cutting down the soft cassava stem, and a little hoe for digging out the tuber. Fortunately, a light rain had fallen during the night and the soil would not be very hard. "It will not take us long to harvest as much as we like," said Ekwefi. "But the leaves will be wet," said Ezinma. Her basket was balanced on her head, and her arms folded across her breasts. She felt cold. "I dislike cold water dropping on my back. We should have waited for the sun to rise and dry the leaves." Obiageli called her "Salt" because she said that she disliked water. "Are you afraid you may dissolve?" The harvesting was easy, as Ekwefi had said. Ezinma shook every tree violently with a long stick before she bent down to cut the stem and dig out the tuber. Sometimes it was not necessary to dig. They just pulled the stump, and earth rose, roots snapped below, and the tuber was pulled out. When they had harvested a sizable heap they carried it down in two trips to the stream, where every woman had a shallow well for fermenting her cassava. "It should be ready in four days or even three," said Obiageli. "They are young tubers." "They are not all that young," said Ekwefi. "I planted the farm nearly two years ago. It is a poor soil and that is why the tubers are so small." Okonkwo never did things by halves. When his wife Ekwefi protested that two goats were sufficient for the feast he told her that it was not her affair. "I am calling a feast because I have the wherewithal. I cannot live on the bank of a river and wash my hands with spittle. My mother's people have been good to me and I must show my gratitude." And so three goats were slaughtered and a number of fowls. It was like a wedding feast. There was foo-foo and yam pottage, egusi soup and bitter-leaf soup and pots and pots of palm-wine. All the umunna were invited to the feast, all the descendants of Okolo, who had lived about two hundred years before. The oldest member of this extensive family was Okonkwo's uncle, Uchendu. The kola nut was given him to break, and he prayed to the ancestors. He asked them for health and children. "We do not ask for wealth because he that has health and children will also have wealth. We do not pray to have more money but to have more kinsmen. We are better than animals because we have kinsmen. An animal rubs its itching flank against a tree, a man asks his kinsman to scratch him." He prayed especially for Okonkwo and his family. He then broke the kola nut and threw one of the lobes on the ground for the ancestors. As the broken kola nuts were passed round, Okonkwo's wives and children and those who came to help them with the cooking began to bring out the food. His sons brought out the pots of palm-wine. There was so much food and drink that many kinsmen whistled in surprise. When all was laid out, Okonkwo rose to speak. "I beg you to accept this little kola," he said. "It is not to pay you back for all you did for me in these seven years. A child cannot pay for its mother's milk. I have only called you together because it is good for kinsmen to meet." Yam pottage was served first because it was lighter than foo-foo and because yam always came first. Then the foo-foo was served. Some kinsmen ate it with egusi soup and others with bitter-leaf soup. The meat was then shared so that every member of the umunna had a portion. Every man rose in order of years and took a share. Even the few kinsmen who had not been able to come had their shares taken out for them in due term. As the palm-wine was drunk one of the oldest members of the umunna rose to thank Okonkwo: "If I say that we did not expect such a big feast I will be suggesting that we did not know how openhanded our son, Okonkwo, is. We all know him, and we expected a big feast. But it turned out to be even bigger than we expected. Thank you. May all you took out return again tenfold. It is good in these days when the younger generation consider themselves wiser than their sires to see a man doing things in the grand, old way. A man who calls his kinsmen to a feast does not do so to save them from starving. They all have food in their own homes. When we gather together in the moonlit village ground it is not because of the moon. Every man can see it in his own compound. We come together because it is good for kinsmen to do so. You may ask why I am saying all this. I say it because I fear for the younger generation, for you people." He waved his arm where most of the young men sat. "As for me, I have only a short while to live, and so have Uchendu and Unachukwu and Emefo. But I fear for you young people because you do not understand how strong is the bond of kinship. You do not know what it is to speak with one voice. And what is the result? An abominable religion has settled among you. A man can now leave his father and his brothers. He can curse the gods of his fathers and his ancestors, like a hunter's dog that suddenly goes mad and turns on his master. I fear for you, I fear for the clan." He turned again to Okonkwo and said, "Thank you for calling us together." CHAPTER TWENTY Seven years was a long time to be away from one's clan. A man's place was not always there, waiting for him. As soon as he left, someone else rose and filled it. The clan was like a lizard, if it lost its tail it soon grew another. Okonkwo knew these things. He knew that he had lost his place among the nine masked spirits who administered justice in the clan. He had lost the chance to lead his warlike clan against the new religion, which, he was told, had gained ground. He had lost the years in which he might have taken the highest titles in the clan. But some of these losses were not irreparable. He was determined that his return should be marked by his people. He would return with a flourish, and regain the seven wasted years. Even in his first year in exile he had begun to plan for his return. The first thing he would do would be to rebuild his compound on a more magnificent scale. He would build a bigger barn than he had had before and he would build huts for two new wives. Then he would show his wealth by initiating his sons into the ozo society. Only the really great men in the clan were able to do this. Okonkwo saw clearly the high esteem in which he would be held, and he saw himself taking the highest title in the land. As the years of exile passed one by one it seemed to him that his chi might now be making amends for the past disaster. His yams grew abundantly, not only in his motherland but also in Umuofia, where his friend gave them out year by year to sharecroppers. Then the tragedy of his first son had occurred. At first it appeared as if it might prove too great for his spirit. But it was a resilient spirit, and in the end Okonkwo overcame his sorrow. He had five other sons and he would bring them up in the way of the clan. He sent for the five sons and they came and sat in his obi. The youngest of them was four years old. "You have all seen the great abomination of your brother. Now he is no longer my son or your brother. I will only have a son who is a man, who will hold his head up among my people. If any one of you prefers to be a woman, let him follow Nwoye now while I am alive so that I can curse him. If you turn against me when I am dead I will visit you and break your neck." Okonkwo was very lucky in his daughters. He never stopped regretting that Ezinma was a girl. Of all his children she alone understood his every mood. A bond of sympathy had grown between them as the years had passed. Ezinma grew up in her father's exile and became one of the most beautiful girls in Mbanta. She was called Crystal of Beauty, as her mother had been called in her youth. The young ailing girl who had caused her mother so much heartache had been transformed, almost overnight, into a healthy, buoyant maiden. She had, it was true, her moments of depression when she would snap at everybody like an angry dog. These moods descended on her suddenly and for no apparent reason. But they were very rare and short-lived. As long as they lasted, she could bear no other person but her father. Many young men and prosperous middle-aged men of Mbanta came to marry her. But she refused them all, because her father had called her one evening and said to her: "There are many good and prosperous people here, but I shall be happy if you marry in Umuofia when we return home." That was all he had said. But Ezinma had seen clearly all the thought and hidden meaning behind the few words. And she had agreed. "Your half-sister, Obiageli, will not understand me," Okonkwo said. "But you can explain to her." Although they were almost the same age, Ezinma wielded a strong influence over her half-sister. She explained to her why they should not marry yet, and she agreed also. And so the two of them refused every offer of marriage in Mbanta. "I wish she were a boy," Okonkwo thought within himself. She understood things so perfectly. Who else among his children could have read his thoughts so well? With two beautiful grown-up daughters his return to Umuofia would attract considerable attention. His future sons-in-law would be men of authority in the clan. The poor and unknown would not dare to come forth. Umuofia had indeed changed during the seven years Okonkwo had been in exile. The church had come and led many astray. Not only the low-born and the outcast but sometimes a worthy man had joined it. Such a man was Ogbuefi Ugonna, who had taken two titles, and who like a madman had cut the anklet of his titles and cast it away to join the Christians. The white missionary was very proud of him and he was one of the first men in Umuofia to receive the sacrament of Holy Communion, or Holy Feast as it was called in Ibo. Ogbuefi Ugonna had thought of the Feast in terms of eating and drinking, only more holy than the village variety. He had therefore put his drinking-horn into his goatskin bag for the occasion. But apart from the church, the white men had also brought a government. They had built a court where the District Commissioner judged cases in ignorance. He had court messengers who brought men to him for trial. Many of these messengers came from Umuru on the bank of the Great River, where the white men first came many years before and where they had built the centre of their religion and trade and government. These court messengers were greatly hated in Umuofia because they were foreigners and also arrogant and high-handed. They were called kotma, and because of their ash-coloured shorts they earned the additional name of Ashy Buttocks. They guarded the prison, which was full of men who had offended against the white man's law. Some of these prisoners had thrown away their twins and some had molested the Christians. They were beaten in the prison by the kotma and made to work every morning clearing the government compound and fetching wood for the white Commissioner and the court messengers. Some of these prisoners were men of title who should be above such mean occupation. They were grieved by the indignity and mourned for their neglected farms. As they cut grass in the morning the younger men sang in time with the strokes of their machetes: "Kotma of the ashy buttocks, He is fit to be a slave. The white man has no sense, He is fit to be a slave." The court messengers did not like to be called Ashy-Buttocks, and they beat the men. But the song spread in Umuofia. Okonkwo's head was bowed in sadness as Obierika told him these things. "Perhaps I have been away too long," Okonkwo said, almost to himself. "But I cannot understand these things you tell me. What is it that has happened to our people? Why have they lost the power to fight?" "Have you not heard how the white man wiped out Abame?" asked Obierika. "I have heard," said Okonkwo. "But I have also heard that Abame people were weak and foolish. Why did they not fight back? Had they no guns and machetes? We would be cowards to compare ourselves with the men of Abame. Their fathers had never dared to stand before our ancestors. We must fight these men and drive them from the land." "It is already too late," said Obierika sadly. "Our own men and our sons have joined the ranks of the stranger. They have joined his religion and they help to uphold his government. If we should try to drive out the white men in Umuofia we should find it easy. There are only two of them. But what of our own people who are following their way and have been given power? They would go to Umuru and bring the soldiers, and we would be like Abame." He paused for a long time and then said: "I told you on my last visit to Mbanta how they hanged Aneto." "What has happened to that piece of land in dispute?" asked Okonkwo. "The white man's court has decided that it should belong to Nnama's family, who had given much money to the white man's messengers and interpreter." "Does the white man understand our custom about land?" "How can he when he does not even speak our tongue? But he says that our customs are bad, and our own brothers who have taken up his religion also say that our customs are bad. How do you think we can fight when our own brothers have turned against us? The white man is very clever. He came quietly and peaceably with his religion. We were amused at his foolishness and allowed him to stay. Now he has won our brothers, and our clan can no longer act like one. He has put a knife on the things that held us together and we have fallen apart." "How did they get hold of Ancto to hang him?" asked Okonkwo. "When he killed Oduche in the fight over the land, he fled to Aninta to escape the wrath of the earth. This was about eight days after the fight, because Oduche had not died immediately from his wounds. It was on the seventh day that he died. But everybody knew that he was going to die and Aneto got his belongings together in readiness to flee. But the Christians had told the white man about the accident, and he sent his kotma to catch Aneto. He was imprisoned with all the leaders of his family. In the end Oduche died and Aneto was taken to Umuru and hanged. The other people were released, but even now they have not found the mouth with which to tell of their suffering." The two men sat in silence for a long while afterwards. CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE There were many men and women in Umuofia who did not feel as strongly as Okonkwo about the new dispensation. The white man had indeed brought a lunatic religion, but he had also built a trading store and for the first time palm-oil and kernel became things of great price, and much money flowed into Umuofia. And even in the matter of religion there was a growing feeling that there might be something in it after all, something vaguely akin to method in the overwhelming madness. This growing feeling was due to Mr. Brown, the white missionary, who was very firm in restraining his flock from provoking the wrath of the clan. One member in particular was very difficult to restrain. His name was Enoch and his father was the priest of the snake cult. The story went around that Enoch had killed and eaten the sacred python, and that his father had cursed him. Mr. Brown preached against such excess of zeal. Everything was possible, he told his energetic flock, but everything was not expedient. And so Mr. Brown came to be respected even by the clan, because he trod softly on its faith. He made friends with some of the great men of the clan and on one of his frequent visits to the neighbouring villages he had been presented with a carved elephant tusk, which was a sign of dignity and rank. One of the great men in that village was called Akunna and he had given one of his sons to be taught the white man's knowledge in Mr. Brown's school. Whenever Mr. Brown went to that village he spent long hours with Akunna in his obi talking through an interpreter about religion. Neither of them succeeded in converting the other but they learned more about their different beliefs. "You say that there is one supreme God who made heaven and earth," said Akunna on one of Mr. Brown's visits. "We also believe in Him and call Him Chukwu. He made all the world and the other gods." "There are no other gods," said Mr. Brown. "Chukwu is the only God and all others are false. You carve a piece of woodlike that one" (he pointed at the rafters from which Akunna's carved Ikenga hung), "and you call it a god. But it is still a piece of wood." "Yes," said Akunna. "It is indeed a piece of wood. The tree from which it came was made by Chukwu, as indeed all minor gods were. But He made them for His messengers so that we could approach Him through them. It is like yourself. You are the head of your church." "No," protested Mr. Brown. "The head of my church is God Himself." "I know," said Akunna, "but there must be a head in this world among men. Somebody like yourself must be the head here." "The head of my church in that sense is in England." "That is exactly what I am saying. The head of your church is in your country. He has sent you here as his messenger. And you have also appointed your own messengers and servants. Or let me take another example, the District Commissioner. He is sent by your king." "They have a queen," said the interpreter on his own account. "Your queen sends her messenger, the District Commissioner. He finds that he cannot do the work alone and so he appoints kotma to help him. It is the same with God, or Chukwu. He appoints the smaller gods to help Him because His work is too great for one person." "You should not think of Him as a person," said Mr. Brown. "It is because you do so that you imagine He must need helpers. And the worst thing about it is that you give all the worship to the false gods you have created." "That is not so. We make sacrifices to the little gods, but when they fail and there is no one else to turn to we go to Chukwu. It is right to do so. We approach a great man through his servants. But when his servants fail to help us, then we go to the last source of hope. We appear to pay greater attention to the little gods but that is not so. We worry them more because we are afraid to worry their Master. Our fathers knew that Chukwu was the Overlord and that is why many of them gave their children the name Chukwuka "Chukwu is Supreme." "You said one interesting thing," said Mr. Brown. "You are afraid of Chukwu. In my religion Chukwu is a loving Father and need not be feared by those who do His will." "But we must fear Him when we are not doing His will," said Akunna. "And who is to tell His will? It is too great to be known." In this way Mr. Brown learned a good deal about the religion of the clan and he came to the conclusion that a frontal attack on it would not succeed. And so he built a school and a little hospital in Umuofia. He went from family to family begging people to send their children to his school. But at first they only sent their slaves or sometimes their lazy children. Mr. Brown begged and argued and prophesied. He said that the leaders of the land in the future would be men and women who had learned to read and write. If Umuofia failed to send her children to the school, strangers would come from other places to rule them. They could already see that happening in the Native Court, where the D. C. was surrounded by strangers who spoke his tongue. Most of these strangers came from the distant town of Umuru on the bank of the Great River where the white man first went. In the end Mr. Brown's arguments began to have an effect. More people came to learn in his school, and he encouraged them with gifts of singlets and towels. They were not all young, these people who came to learn. Some of them were thirty years old or more. They worked on their farms in the morning and went to school in the afternoon. And it was not long before the people began to say that the white man's medicine was quick in working. Mr. Brown's school produced quick results. A few months in it were enough to make one a court messenger or even a court clerk. Those who stayed longer became teachers,- and from Umuofia labourers went forth into the Lord's vineyard. New churches were established in the surrounding villages and a few schools with them. From the very beginning religion and education went hand in hand. Mr. Brown's mission grew from strength to strength, and because of its link with the new administration it earned a new social prestige. But Mr. Brown himself was breaking down in health. At first he ignored the warning signs. But in the end he had to leave his flock, sad and broken. It was in the first rainy season after Okonkwo's return to Umuofia that Mr. Brown left for home. As soon as he had learned of Okonkwo's return five months earlier, the missionary had immediately paid him a visit. He had just sent Okonkwo's son, Nwoye, who was now called Isaac, to the new training college for teachers in Umuru. And he had hoped that Okonkwo would be happy to hear of it. But Okonkwo had driven him away with the threat that if he came into his compound again, he would be carried out of it. Okonkwo's return to his native land was not as memorable as he had wished. It was true his two beautiful daughters aroused great interest among suitors and marriage negotiations were soon in progress, but, beyond that, Umuofia did not appear to have taken any special notice of the warrior's return. The clan had undergone such profound change during his exile that it was barely recognisable. The new religion and government and the trading stores were very much in the people's eyes and minds. There were still many who saw these new institutions as evil, but even they talked and thought about little else, and certainly not about Okonkwo's return. And it was the wrong year too. If Okonkwo had immediately initiated his two sons into the ozo society as he had planned he would have caused a stir. But the initiation rite was performed once in three years in Umuofia, and he had to wait for nearly two years for the next round of ceremonies. Okonkwo was deeply grieved. And it was not just a personal grief. He mourned for the clan, which he saw breaking up and falling apart, and he mourned for the warlike men of Umuofia, who had so unaccountably become soft like women. CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO Mr. Brown's successor was the Reverend James Smith, and he was a different kind of man. He condemned openly Mr. Brown's policy of compromise and accommodation. He saw things as black and white. And black was evil. He saw the world as a battlefield in which the children of light were locked in mortal conflict with the sons of darkness. He spoke in his sermons about sheep and goats and about wheat and tares. He believed in slaying the prophets of Baal. Mr. Smith was greatly distressed by the ignorance which many of his flock showed even in such things as the Trinity and the Sacraments. It only showed that they were seeds sown on a rocky soil. Mr. Brown had thought of nothing but numbers. He should have known that the kingdom of God did not depend on large crowds. Our Lord Himself stressed the importance of fewness. Narrow is the way and few the number. To fill the Lord's holy temple with an idolatrous crowd clamouring for signs was a folly of everlasting consequence. Our Lord used the whip only once in His lifeto drive the crowd away from His church. Within a few weeks of his arrival in Umuofia Mr. Smith suspended a young woman from the church for pouring new wine into old bottles. This woman had allowed her heathen husband to mutilate her dead child. The child had been declared an ogbanje, plaguing its mother by dying and entering her womb to be born again. Lour times this child had run its evil round. And so it was mutilated to discourage it from returning. Mr. Smith was filled with wrath when he heard of this. He disbelieved the story which even some of the most faithful confirmed, the story of really evil children who were not deterred by mutilation, but came back with all the scars. He replied that such stories were spread in the world by the Devil to lead men astray. Those who believed such stories were unworthy of the Lord's table. There was a saying in Umuofia that as a man danced so the drums were beaten for him. Mr. Smith danced a furious step and so the drums went mad. The over-zealous converts who had smarted under Mr. Brown's restraining hand now flourished in full favour. One of them was Enoch, the son of the snake-priest who was believed to have killed and eaten the sacred python. Enoch's devotion to the new faith had seemed so much greater than Mr. Brown's that the villagers called him the outsider who wept louder than the bereaved. Enoch was short and slight of build, and always seemed in great haste. His feet were short and broad, and when he stood or walked his heels came together and his feet opened outwards as if they had quarrelled and meant to go in different directions. Such was the excessive energy bottled up in Enoch's small body that it was always erupting in quarrels and fights. On Sundays he always imagined that the sermon was preached for the benefit of his enemies. And if he happened to sit near one of them he would occasionally turn to give him a meaningful look, as if to say, "I told you so." It was Enoch who touched off the great conflict between church and clan in Umuofia which had been gathering since Mr. Brown left. It happened during the annual ceremony which was held in honour of the earth deity. At such times the ancestors of the clan who had been committed to Mother Earth at their death emerged again as egwugwu through tiny ant-holes. One of the greatest crimes a man could commit was to unmask an egwugwu in public, or to say or do anything which might reduce its immortal prestige in the eyes of the uninitiated. And this was what Enoch did. The annual worship of the earth goddess fell on a Sunday, and the masked spirits were abroad. The Christian women who had been to church could not therefore go home. Some of their men had gone out to beg the egwugwu to retire for a short while for the women to pass. They agreed and were already retiring, when Enoch boasted aloud that they would not dare to touch a Christian. Whereupon they all came back and one of them gave Enoch a good stroke of the cane, which was always carried. Enoch fell on him and tore off his mask. The other egwugwu immediately surrounded their desecrated companion, to shield him from the profane gaze of women and children, and led him away. Enoch had killed an ancestral spirit, and Umuofia was thrown into confusion. That night the Mother of the Spirits walked the length and breadth of the clan, weeping for her murdered son. It was a terrible night. Not even the oldest man in Umuofia had ever heard such a strange and fearful sound, and it was never to be heard again. It seemed as if the very soul of the tribe wept for a great evil that was coming its own death. On the next day all the masked egwugwu of Umuofia assembled in the marketplace. They came from all the quarters of the clan and even from the neighbouring villages. The dreaded Otakagu came from Imo, and Ekwensu, dangling a white cock, arrived from Uli. It was a terrible gathering. The eerie voices of countless spirits, the bells that clattered behind some of them, and the clash of machetes as they ran forwards and backwards and saluted one another, sent tremors of fear into every heart. For the first time in living memory the sacred bull-roarer was heard in broad daylight. From the marketplace the furious band made for Enoch's compound. Some of the elders of the clan went with them, wearing heavy protections of charms and amulets. These were men whose arms were strong in ogwu, or medicine. As for the ordinary men and women, they listened from the safety of their huts. The leaders of the Christians had met together at Mr. Smith's parsonage on the previous night. As they deliberated they could hear the Mother of Spirits wailing for her son. The chilling sound affected Mr. Smith, and for the first time he seemed to be afraid. "What are they planning to do?" he asked. No one knew, because such a thing had never happened before. Mr. Smith would have sent for the District Commissioner and his court messengers, but they had gone on tour on the previous day. "One thing is clear," said Mr. Smith. "We cannot offer physical resistance to them. Our strength lies in the Lord." They knelt down together and prayed to God for delivery. "O Lord, save Thy people," cried Mr. Smith. "And bless Thine inheritance," replied the men. They decided that Enoch should be hidden in the parsonage for a day or two. Enoch himself was greatly disappointed when he heard this, for he had hoped that a holy war was imminent,- and there were a few other Christians who thought like him. But wisdom prevailed in the camp of the faithful and many lives were thus saved. The band of egwugwu moved like a furious whirlwind to Enoch's compound and with machete and fire reduced it to a desolate heap. And from there they made for the church, intoxicated with destruction. Mr. Smith was in his church when he heard the masked spirits coming. He walked quietly to the door which commanded the approach to the church compound, and stood there. But when the first three or four egwugwu appeared on the church compound he nearly bolted. He overcame this impulse and instead of running away he went down the two steps that led up to the church and walked towards the approaching spirits. They surged forward, and a long stretch of the bamboo fence with which the church compound was surrounded gave way before them. Discordant bells clanged, machetes clashed and the air was full of dust and weird sounds. Mr. Smith heard a sound of footsteps behind him. He turned round and saw Okeke, his interpreter. Okeke had not been on the best of terms with his master since he had strongly condemned Enoch's behaviour at the meeting of the leaders of the church during the night. Okeke had gone as far as to say that Enoch should not be hidden in the parsonage, because he would only draw the wrath of the clan on the pastor. Mr. Smith had rebuked him in very strong language, and had not sought his advice that morning. But now, as he came up and stood by him confronting the angry spirits, Mr. Smith looked at him and smiled. It was a wan smile, but there was deep gratitude there. For a brief moment the onrush of the egwugwu was checked by the unexpected composure of the two men. But it was only a momentary check, like the tense silence between blasts of thunder. The second onrush was greater than the first. It swallowed up the two men. Then an unmistakable voice rose above the tumult and there was immediate silence. Space was made around the two men, and Ajofia began to speak. Ajofia was the leading egwugwu of Umuofia. He was the head and spokesman of the nine ancestors who administered justice in the clan. His voice was unmistakable and so he was able to bring immediate peace to the agitated spirits. He then addressed Mr. Smith, and as he spoke clouds of smoke rose from his head. "The body of the white man, I salute you," he said, using the language in which immortals spoke to men. "The body of the white man, do you know me?" he asked. Mr. Smith looked at his interpreter, but Okeke, who was a native of distant Umuru, was also at a loss. Ajofia laughed in his guttural voice. It was like the laugh of rusty metal. "They are strangers," he said, "and they are ignorant. But let that pass." He turned round to his comrades and saluted them, calling them the fathers of Umuofia. He dug his rattling spear into the ground and it shook with metallic life. Then he turned once more to the missionary and his interpreter. "Tell the white man that we will not do him any harm," he said to the interpreter. "Tell him to go back to his house and leave us alone. We liked his brother who was with us before. He was foolish, but we liked him, and for his sake we shall not harm his brother. But this shrine which he built must be destroyed. We shall no longer allow it in our midst. It has bred untold abominations and we have come to put an end to it." He turned to his comrades. "Fathers of Umuofia, I salute you." and they replied with one guttural voice. He turned again to the missionary. "You can stay with us if you like our ways. You can worship your own god. It is good that a man should worship the gods and the spirits of his fathers. Go back to your house so that you may not be hurt. Our anger is great but we have held it down so that we can talk to you." Mr. Smith said to his interpreter: "Tell them to go away from here. This is the house of God and I will not live to see it desecrated." Okeke interpreted wisely to the spirits and leaders of Umuofia: "The white man says he is happy you have come to him with your grievances, like friends. He will be happy if you leave the matter in his hands." "We cannot leave the matter in his hands because he does not understand our customs, just as we do not understand his. We say he is foolish because he does not know our ways, and perhaps he says we are foolish because we do not know his. Let him go away." Mr. Smith stood his ground. But he could not save his church. When the egwugwu went away the red-earth church which Mr. Brown had built was a pile of earth and ashes. And for the moment the spirit of the clan was pacified. CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE For the first time in many years Okonkwo had a feeling that was akin to happiness. The times which had altered so unaccountably during his exile seemed to be coming round again. The clan which had turned false on him appeared to be making amends. He had spoken violently to his clansmen when they had met in the marketplace to decide on their action. And they had listened to him with respect. It was like the good old days again, when a warrior was a warrior. Although they had not agreed to kill the missionary or drive away the Christians, they had agreed to do something substantial. And they had done it. Okonkwo was almost happy again. For two days after the destruction of the church, nothing happened. Every man in Umuofia went about armed with a gun or a machete. They would not be caught unawares, like the men of Abame. Then the District Commissioner returned from his tour. Mr. Smith went immediately to him and they had a long discussion. The men of Umuofia did not take any notice of this, and if they did, they thought it was not important. The missionary often went to see his brother white man. There was nothing strange in that. Three days later the District Commissioner sent his sweet-tongued messenger to the leaders of Umuofia asking them to meet him in his headquarters. That also was not strange. He often asked them to hold such palavers, as he called them. Okonkwo was among the six leaders he invited. Okonkwo warned the others to be fully armed. "An Umuofia man does not refuse a call," he said. "He may refuse to do what he is asked, he does not refuse to be asked. But the times have changed, and we must be fully prepared." And so the six men went to see the District Commissioner, armed with their machetes. They did not carry guns, for that would be unseemly. They were led into the courthouse where the District Commissioner sat. He received them politely. They unslung their goatskin bags and their sheathed machetes, put them on the floor, and sat down. "I have asked you to come," began the Commissioner, "because of what happened during my absence. I have been told a few things but I cannot believe them until I have heard your own side. Let us talk about it like friends and find a way of ensuring that it does not happen again." Ogbuefi Ekwueme rose to his feet and began to tell the story. "Wait a minute," said the Commissioner. "I want to bring in my men so that they too can hear your grievances and take warning. Many of them come from distant places and although they speak your tongue they are ignorant of your customs. James! Go and bring in the men." His interpreter left the courtroom and soon returned with twelve men. They sat together with the men of Umuofia, and Ogbuefi Ekwueme began to tell the story of how Enoch murdered an egwugwu. It happened so quickly that the six men did not see it coming. There was only a brief scuffle, too brief even to allow the drawing of a sheathed machete. The six men were handcuffed and led into the guardroom. "We shall not do you any harm," said the District Commissioner to them later, "if only you agree to cooperate with us. We have brought a peaceful administration to you and your people so that you may be happy. If any man ill-treats you we shall come to your rescue. But we will not allow you to ill-treat others. We have a court of law where we judge cases and administer justice just as it is done in my own country under a great queen. I have brought you here because you joined together to molest others, to burn people's houses and their place of worship. That must not happen in the dominion of our queen, the most powerful ruler in the world. I have decided that you will pay a fine of two hundred bags of cowries. You will be released as soon as you agree to this and undertake to collect that fine from your people. What do you say to that?" The six men remained sullen and silent and the Commissioner left them for a while. He told the court messengers, when he left the guardroom, to treat the men with respect because they were the leaders of Umuofia. They said, "Yes sir," and saluted. As soon as the District Commissioner left, the head messenger, who was also the prisoners' barber, took down his razor and shaved off all the hair on the men's heads. They were still handcuffed, and they just sat and moped. "Who is the chief among you?" the court messengers asked in jest. "We see that every pauper wears the anklet of title in Umuofia. Does it cost as much as ten cowries?" The six men ate nothing throughout that day and the next. They were not even given any water to drink, and they could not go out to urinate or go into the bush when they were pressed. At night the messengers came in to taunt them and to knock their shaven heads together. Even when the men were left alone they found no words to speak to one another. It was only on the third day, when they could no longer bear the hunger and the insults, that they began to talk about giving in. "We should have killed the white man if you had listened to me," Okonkwo snarled. "We could have been in Umuru now waiting to be hanged," someone said to him. "Who wants to kill the white man?" asked a messenger who had just rushed in. Nobody spoke. "You are not satisfied with your crime, but you must kill the white man on top of it." He carried a strong stick, and he hit each man a few blows on the head and back. Okonkwo was choked with hate. As soon as the six men were locked up, court messengers went into Umuofia to tell the people that their leaders would not be released unless they paid a fine of two hundred and fifty bags of cowries. "Unless you pay the fine immediately," said their headman, "we will take your leaders to Umuru before the big white man, and hang them." This story spread quickly through the villages, and was added to as it went. Some said that the men had already been taken to Umuru and would be hanged on the following day. Some said that their families would also be hanged. Others said that soldiers were already on their way to shoot the people of Umuofia as they had done in Abame. It was the time of the full moon. But that night the voice of children was not heard. The village ilo where they always gathered for a moon-play was empty. The women of Iguedo did not meet in their secret enclosure to learn a new dance to be displayed later to the village. Young men who were always abroad in the moonlight kept their huts that night. Their manly voices were not heard on the village paths as they went to visit their friends and lovers. Umuofia was like a startled animal with ears erect, sniffing the silent, ominous air and not knowing which way to run. The silence was broken by the village crier beating his sonorous ogene. He called every man in Umuofia, from the Akakanma age group upwards, to a meeting in the marketplace after the morning meal. He went from one end of the village to the other and walked all its breadth. He did not leave out any of the main footpaths. Okonkwo's compound was like a deserted homestead. It was as if cold water had been poured on it. His family was all there, but everyone spoke in whispers. His daughter Ezinma had broken her twenty-eight day visit to the family of her future husband, and returned home when she heard that her father had been imprisoned, and was going to be hanged. As soon as she got home she went to Obierika to ask what the men of Umuofia were going to do about it. But Obierika had not been home since morning. His wives thought he had gone to a secret meeting. Ezinma was satisfied that something was being done. On the morning after the village crier's appeal the men of Umuofia met in the marketplace and decided to collect without delay two hundred and fifty bags of cowries to appease the white man. They did not know that fifty bags would go to the court messengers, who had increased the fine for that purpose. CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR Okonkwo and his fellow prisoners were set free as soon as the fine was paid. The District Commissioner spoke to them again about the great queen, and about peace and good government. But the men did not listen. They just sat and looked at him and at his interpreter. In the end they were given back their bags and sheathed machetes and told to go home. They rose and left the courthouse. They neither spoke to anyone nor among themselves. The courthouse, like the church, was built a little way outside the village. The footpath that linked them was a very busy one because it also led to the stream, beyond the court. It was open and sandy. Footpaths were open and sandy in the dry season. But when the rains came the bush grew thick on either side and closed in on the path. It was now dry season. As they made their way to the village the six men met women and children going to the stream with their waterpots. But the men wore such heavy and fearsome looks that the women and children did not say "nno" or "welcome" to them, but edged out of the way to let them pass. In the village little groups of men joined them until they became a sizable company. They walked silently. As each of the six men got to his compound, he turned in, taking some of the crowd with him. The village was astir in a silent, suppressed way. Ezinma had prepared some food for her father as soon as news spread that the six men would be released. She took it to him in his obi. He ate absent-mindedly. He had no appetite, he only ate to please her. His male relations and friends had gathered in his obi, and Obierika was urging him to eat. Nobody else spoke, but they noticed the long stripes on Okonkwo's back where the warder's whip had cut into his flesh. The village crier was abroad again in the night. He beat his iron gong and announced that another meeting would be held in the morning. Everyone knew that Umuofia was at last going to speak its mind about the things that were happening. Okonkwo slept very little that night. The bitterness in his heart was now mixed with a kind of childlike excitement, before he had gone to bed he had brought down his war dress, which he had not touched since his return from exile. He had shaken out his smoked raffia skirt and examined his tall feather head-gear and his shield. They were all satisfactory, he had thought. As he lay on his bamboo bed he thought about the treatment he had received in the white man's court, and he swore vengeance. If Umuofia decided on war, all would be well. But If they chose to be cowards he would go out and avenge all himself. He thought about wars in the past. The noblest, he thought, was the war against Isike. In those days Okudo was still alive. Okudo sang a war song in a way that no other man could. He was not a fighter, but his voice turned every man into a lion. "Worthy men are no more," Okonkwo sighed as he remembered those days. "Isike will never forget how we slaughtered them in that war. We killed twelve of their men and they killed only two of ours. Before the end of the fourth market week they were suing for peace. Those were days when men were men." As he thought of these things he heard the sound of the iron gong in the distance. He listened carefully, and could just hear the crier's voice. But it was very faint. He turned on his bed and his back hurt him. He ground his teeth. The crier was drawing nearer and nearer until he passed by Okonkwo's compound. "The greatest obstacle in Umuofia," Okonkwo thought bitterly, "is that coward, Egonwanne. His sweet tongue can change fire into cold ash. When he speaks he moves our men to impotence. If they had ignored his womanish wisdom five years ago, we would not have come to this." He ground his teeth. "Tomorrow he will tell them that our fathers never fought a 'war of blame.' If they listen to him I shall leave them and plan my own revenge." The crier's voice had once more become faint, and the distance had taken the harsh edge off his iron gong. Okonkwo turned from one side to the other and derived a kind of pleasure from the pain his back gave him. "Let Egonwanne talk about a 'war of blame' tomorrow and I shall show him my back and head." He ground his teeth. The marketplace began to fill as soon as the sun rose. Obierika was waiting in his obi when Okonkwo came along and called him. He hung his goatskin bag and his sheathed machete on his shoulder and went out to join him. Obierika's hut was close to the road and he saw every man who passed to the marketplace. He had exchanged greetings with many who had already passed that morning. When Okonkwo and Obierika got to the meeting place there were already so many people that if one threw up a grain of sand it would not find its way to the earth again. And many more people were coming from every quarter of the nine villages. It warmed Okonkwo's heart to see such strength of numbers. But he was looking for one man in particular, the man whose tongue he dreaded and despised so much. "Can you see him?" he asked Obierika. "Who?" "Egonwanne," he said, his eyes roving from one corner of the huge marketplace to the other. Most of the men sat on wooden stools they had brought with them. "No," said Obierika, casting his eyes over the crowd. "Yes, there he is, under the silk-cotton tree. Are you afraid he would convince us not to fight?" "Afraid? I do not care what he does to you. I despise him and those who listen to him. I shall fight alone if I choose." They spoke at the top of their voices because everybody was talking, and it was like the sound of a great market. "I shall wait till he has spoken," Okonkwo thought. "Then I shall speak." "But how do you know he will speak against war?" Obierika asked after a while. "Because I know he is a coward," said Okonkwo. Obierika did not hear the rest of what he said because at that moment somebody touched his shoulder from behind and he turned round to shake hands and exchange greetings with five or six friends. Okonkwo did not turn round even though he knew the voices. He was in no mood to exchange greetings. But one of the men touched him and asked about the people of his compound. "They are well," he replied without interest. The first man to speak to Umuofia that morning was Okika, one of the six who had been imprisoned. Okika was a great man and an orator. But he did not have the booming voice which a first speaker must use to establish silence in the assembly of the clan. Onyeka had such a voice, and so he was asked to salute Umuofia before Okika began to speak. "Umuofia kwenu!" he bellowed, raising his left arm and pushing the air with his open hand. "Yaa!" roared Umuofia. "Umuofia kwenu!" he bellowed again, and again and again, facing a new direction each time. And the crowd answered, "Yaa!" There was immediate silence as though cold water had been poured on a roaring flame. Okika sprang to his feet and also saluted his clansmen four times. Then he began to speak: "You all know why we are here, when we ought to be building our barns or mending our huts, when we should be putting our compounds in order. My father used to say to me: 'Whenever you see a toad jumping in broad daylight, then know that something is after its life." When I saw you all pouring into this meeting from all the quarters of our clan so early in the morning, I knew that something was after our life." He paused for a brief moment and then began again: "All our gods are weeping. Idemili is weeping, Ogwugwu is weeping, Agbala is weeping, and all the others. Our dead fathers are weeping because of the shameful sacrilege they are suffering and the abomination we have all seen with our eyes." He stopped again to steady his trembling voice. "This is a great gathering. No clan can boast of greater numbers or greater valour. But are we all here? I ask you: Are all the sons of Umuofia with us here?" A deep murmur swept through the crowd. "They are not," he said. "They have broken the clan and gone their several ways. We who are here this morning have remained true to our fathers, but our brothers have deserted us and joined a stranger to soil their fatherland. If we fight the stranger we shall hit our brothers and perhaps shed the blood of a clansman. But we must do it. Our fathers never dreamed of such a thing, they never killed their brothers. But a white man never came to them. So we must do what our fathers would never have done. Eneke the bird was asked why he was always on the wing and he replied: 'Men have learned to shoot without missing their mark and I have learned to fly without perching on a twig.' We must root out this evil. And if our brothers take the side of evil we must root them out too. And we must do it now. We must bale this water now that it is only ankle-deep..." At this point there was a sudden stir in the crowd and every eye was turned in one direction. There was a sharp bend in the road that led from the marketplace to the white man's court, and to the stream beyond it. And so no one had seen the approach of the five court messengers until they had come round the bend, a few paces from the edge of the crowd. Okonkwo was sitting at the edge. He sprang to his feet as soon as he saw who it was. He confronted the head messenger, trembling with hate, unable to utter a word. The man was fearless and stood his ground, his four men lined up behind him. In that brief moment the world seemed to stand still, waiting. There was utter silence. The men of Umuofia were merged into the mute backcloth of trees and giant creepers, waiting. The spell was broken by the head messenger. "Let me pass!" he ordered. "What do you want here?" "The white man whose power you know too well has ordered this meeting to stop." In a flash Okonkwo drew his machete. The messenger crouched to avoid the blow. It was useless. Okonkwo's machete descended twice and the man's head lay beside his uniformed body. The waiting backcloth jumped into tumultuous life and the meeting was stopped. Okonkwo stood looking at the dead man. He knew that Umuofia would not go to war. He knew because they had let the other messengers escape. They had broken into tumult instead of action. He discerned fright in that tumult. He heard voices asking: "Why did he doit?" He wiped his machete on the sand and went away. CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE When the district commissioner arrived at Okonkwo's compound at the head of an armed band of soldiers and court messengers he found a small crowd of men sitting wearily in the obi. He commanded them to come outside, and they obeyed without a murmur. "Which among you is called Okonkwo?" he asked through his interpreter. "He is not here," replied Obierika. "Where is he?" "He is not here!" The Commissioner became angry and red in the face. He warned the men that unless they produced Okonkwo forthwith he would lock them all up. The men murmured among themselves, and Obierika spoke again. "We can take you where he is, and perhaps your men will help us." The Commissioner did not understand what Obierika meant when he said, "Perhaps your men will help us." One of the most infuriating habits of these people was their love of superfluous words, he thought. Obierika with five or six others led the way. The Commissioner and his men followed their firearms held at the ready. He had warned Obierika that if he and his men played any monkey tricks they would be shot. And so they went. There was a small bush behind Okonkwo's compound. The only opening into this bush from the compound was a little round hole in the red-earth wall through which fowls went in and out in their endless search for food. The hole would not let a man through. It was to this bush that Obierika led the Commissioner and his men. They skirted round the compound, keeping close to the wall. The only sound they made was with their feet as they crushed dry leaves. Then they came to the tree from which Okonkwo's body was dangling, and they stopped dead. "Perhaps your men can help us bring him down and bury him," said Obierika. "We have sent for strangers from another village to do it for us, but they may be a long time coming." The District Commissioner changed instantaneously. The resolute administrator in him gave way to the student of primitive customs. "Why can't you take him down yourselves?" he asked. "It is against our custom," said one of the men. "It is an abomination for a man to take his own life. It is an offence against the Earth, and a man who commits it will not be buried by his clansmen. His body is evil, and only strangers may touch it. That is why we ask your people to bring him down, because you are strangers." "Will you bury him like any other man?" asked the Commissioner. "We cannot bury him. Only strangers can. We shall pay your men to do it. When he has been buried we will then do our duty by him. We shall make sacrifices to cleanse the desecrated land." Obierika, who had been gazing steadily at his friend's dangling body, turned suddenly to the District Commissioner and said ferociously: "That man was one of the greatest men in Umuofia. You drove him to kill himself and now he will be buried like a dog..." He could not say any more. His voice trembled and choked his words. "Shut up!" shouted one of the messengers, quite unnecessarily. "Take down the body," the Commissioner ordered his chief messenger, "and bring it and all these people to the court." "Yes, sah," the messenger said, saluting. The Commissioner went away, taking three or four of the soldiers with him. In the many years in which he had toiled to bring civilization to different parts of Africa he had learned a number of things. One of them was that a District Commissioner must never attend to such undignified details as cutting a hanged man from the tree. Such attention would give the natives a poor opinion of him. In the book which he planned to write he would stress that point. As he walked back to the court he thought about that book. Every day brought him some new material. The story of this man who had killed a messenger and hanged himself would make interesting reading. One could almost write a whole chapter on him. Perhaps not a whole chapter but a reasonable paragraph, at any rate. There was so much else to include, and one must be firm in cutting out details. He had already chosen the title of the book, after much thought: The Pacification of the Primitive Tribes of the Lower Niger. A GLOSSARY OL IBO WORDS AND PHRASES agadi-nwayi: old woman. Agbala: woman; also used of a man who has taken no title. Chi: personal god. efukfu: worthless man. egwugwu: a masquerader who impersonates one of the ancestral spirits of the village. ekwe: a musical instrument; a type of drum made from wood, eneke-nti-oba: a kind of bird, eze-agadi-nwayi: the teeth of an old woman, iba: fever. ilo: the village green, where assemblies for sports, discussions, etc., take place, inyanga: showing off, bragging. isa-ifi: a ceremony. If a wife had been separated from her husband for some time and were then to be re-united with him, this ceremony would be held to ascertain that she had not been unfaithful to him during the time of their separation. iyi-uwa: a special kind of stone which forms the link between an ogbanje and the spirit world. Only if the iyi-uwa were discovered and destroyed would the child not die. jigida: a string of waist beads. kotma: court messenger. The word is not of Ibo origin but is a corruption of "court messenger." kwenu: a shout of approval and greeting, ndichie: elders, nna ayi: our father, nno: welcome. nso-ani: a religious offence of a kind abhorred by everyone, literally earth's taboo, nza: a very small bird. obi: the large living quarters of the head of the family, obodo dike: the land of the brave, ochu: murder or manslaughter. ogbanje: a changeling,- a child who repeatedly dies and returns to its mother to be reborn. It is almost impossible to bring up an ogbanje child without it dying, unless its iyi-uwa is first found and destroyed. ogene: a musical instrument; a kind of gong. oji odu achu-ijiji-o: (cow i. e., the one that uses its tail to drive flies away), osu: outcast. Having been dedicated to a god, the osu was taboo and was not allowed to mix with the freeborn in any way. Oye: the name of one of the four market days, ozo: the name of one of the titles or ranks, tufia: a curse or oath. udu: a musical instrument; a type of drum made from pottery, uli: a dye used by women for drawing patterns on the skin, umuada: a family gathering of daughters, for which the female kinsfolk return to their village of origin. umunna-: a wide group of kinsmen (the masculine form of the word umuada). Uri: part of the betrothal ceremony when the dowry is paid.
<|book_end|>
