

The Madman

He was drawn to markets and straight roads. Not any
tiny neighbourhood market where a handful of garrulous women might gather at sunset to gossip and buy
ogili for the evening's soup, but a huge, engulfing
bazaar beckoning people familiar and strange from far
and near. And not any dusty, old footpath beginning in
this village, and ending in that stream, but broad,
black, mysterious highways without beginning or end.
After much wandering he had discovered two such
markets linked together by such a highway; and so
ended his wandering. One market was AfQ, the other
Eke. The two days between them suited him very
well: before setting out for Eke he had ample time to
wind up his business properly at AfQ. He passed the
night there putting right again his hut after a day of
defilement by two fat-bottomed market women who
said it was their market stall. At first he had put up a
fight but the women had gone and brought their menfolk-four hefty beasts of the bush-to whip him out


of the hut. After that he always avoided them, moving
out on the morning of the market and back in at dusk
to pass the night. Then in the morning he rounded off
his affairs swiftly and set out on that long, beautiful
boa-constrictor of a road to Eke in the distant town of
Ogbu. He held his staff and cudgel at the ready in his
right hand, and with the left he steadied the basket of
his belongings on his head. He had got himself this
cudgel lately to deal with little beasts on the way who
threw stones at him and made fun of their mothers'
nakedness, not his own.
He used to walk in the middle of the road, holding it
in conversation. But one day the driver of a mammywagon and his mate came down on him shouting,
pushing and slapping his face. They said their lorry
very nearly ran over their mother, not him. After that
he avoided those noisy lorries too, with the vagabonds
inside them.


Having walked one day and one night he was now
close to the Eke market-place. From every little sideroad, crowds of market people poured into the big
highway to join the enormous fl ow to Eke. Then he
saw some young ladies with water-pots on their heads
coming towards him, unlike all the rest, away from the
market. This surprised him. Then he saw two more
water-pots rise out of a sloping footpath leading off his
side of the highway. He felt thirsty then and stopped
to think it ovel: Then he set down his basket on the
roadside and turned into the sloping footpath. But
first he begged his highway not to be offended or
continue the journey without him. "I'll get some for
you too," he said coaxingly with a tender backward
glance. "I know you are thirsty."

Nwibe was a man of high standing in Ogbu and was
rising higher; a man of wealth and integrity. He had
just given notice to all the QZQ men of the town that he
proposed to seek admission into their honoured hierarchy in the coming initiation season.
"Your proposal is excellent," said the men of title.
"When we see we shan believe." Which was their
dignUied way of telling you to think it over once again
and make sure you have the means to go through with
it. For QZQ is not a child's naming ceremony; and where
is the man to hide his face who begins the QZQ dance
and then is foot-stuck to the arena? But in this
instance the caution of the elders was no more than a
formality for Nwibe was such a sensible man that no
one could think of him beginning something he was not
sure to finish.
On that Eke day Nwibe had risen early so as to visit
his farm beyond the stream and do some light work
before going to the market at midday to drink a horn
or two of palm-wine with his peers and perhaps buy
that bundle of roofing thatch for the repair of his
wives' huts. As for his own hut he had a coup1e of
years back settled it finally by changing his thatchroof to zinc. Sooner or later he would do the same for
his wives. He could have done Mgboye's hut right
away but decided to wait until he could do the two
together, or else Udenkwo would set the entire
compound on fire. Udenkwo was the junior wife, by
three years, but she never let that worry her. Happily
Mgboye was a woman of peace who rarely demanded
the respect due to her from the other. She would suffer
Udenkwo's provoking tongue sometimes for a whole
day without offering a word in reply. And when she


did reply at all her words were always few and her
voice very low.
That very morning Udenkwo had accused her of
spite and all kinds of wickedness on account of a little
dog.
"What has a little dog done to you?" she screamed
loud enough for half the village to hear. "I ask you,
Mgboye, what is the offense of a puppy this early in
the day?"
"What your puppy did this early in the day," replied
Mgboye, "is that he put his shit-mouth into my souppot."
"And then?"
"And then I smacked him."
"You smacked him! Why don't you cover your souppot? Is it easier to hit a dog than cover a pot? Is a small
puppy to have more sense than a woman who leaves
her soup-pot about . . . ?"
"Enough from you, Udenkwo."
"It is not enough, Mgboye, it is not enough. If that
dog owes you any debt I want to know. Everything I
have, even a little dog I bought to eat my infant's
excrement keeps you awake at nights. You are a bad
woman, Mgboye, you are a very bad woman!"
Nwibe had listened to all of this in silence in his hut.
He knew from the vigour in Udenkwo's voice that she
could go on like this till market-time. So he intervened, in his characteristic manner by calling out to
his senior wife.
"Mgboye! Let me have peace this early morning!"
"Don't you hear all the abuses Udenkwo . . ."
"I hear nothing at all from Udenkwo and I want
peace in my compound. If Udenkwo is crazy must
everybody else go crazy with her? Is one crazy woman
not enough in my compound so early in the day?"

"The great judge has spoken," sang Udenkwo in
a sneering sing-song. "Thank you, great judge.
Udenkwo is mad. Udenkwo is always mad, but those
of you who are sane let . . ."
"Shut your mouth, shameless woman, or a wild
beast will lick your eyes for you this morning. When
will you learn to keep your badness within this
compound instead of shouting it to all Ogbu to hear? I
say shut your mouth!"
There was silence then except for Udenkwo's infant
whose yelling had up till then been swallowed up by
the larger noise of the adults.
"Don't cry, my father," said Udenkwo to him. "They
want to kill your dog, but our people say the man who
decides to chase after a chicken, for him is the
fall"
By the middle of the morning Nwibe had done all
the work he had to do on his farm and was on his way
again to prepare for market. At the little stream he
decided as he always did to wash off the sweat of
work. So he put his cloth on a huge boulder by the
men's bathing section and waded in. There was
nobody else around because of the time of day and
because it was market day. But from instinctive
modesty he turned to face the forest away from the
approaches.


The madman watched him for quite a while. Each time
he bent down to carry water in cupped hands from the
shallow stream to his head and body the madman
smiled at his parted behind. And then remembered.
This was the same hefty man who brought three
others like him and whipped me out of my hut in the
AfQ market. He nodded to himself. And he remembered again: this was the same vagabond who descended on me from the lorry in the middle of my
highway. He nodded once more. And then he remembered yet again: this was the same fellow who set his
children to throw stones at me and make remarks
about their mothers' buttocks, not mine. Then he
laughed.
Nwibe turned sharply round and saw the naked man
laughing, the deep grove of the stream amplifying his
laughter. Then he stopped as suddenly as he had
begun; the merriment vanished from his face.
"I have caught you naked," he said.
Nwibe ran a hand swiftly down his face to clear his
eyes of water.
"I say I have caught you naked, with your thing
dangling about."
"I can see you are hungry for a whipping," said
Nwibe with quiet menace in his voice, for a madman is
said to be easily scared away by the very mention of a
whip. "Wait till I get up there. . . . What are you
doing? Drop it at once . . . I say drop it!"
The madman had picked up Nwibe's cloth and
wrapped it round his own waist. He looked down at
himself and began to laugh again.
"I will kill you," screamed N wibe as he splashed
towards the bank, maddened by anger. "I will whip
that madness out of you today!"
They ran all the way up the steep and rocky
footpath hedged in by the shadowy green forest. A
mist gathered and hung over Nwibe's vision as he ran,
stumbled, fell, pulled himself up again and stumbled
on, shouting and cursing. The other, despite his
unaccustomed encumbrance steadily increased his
lead, for he was spare and wiry, a thing made for speed. Furthermore, he did not waste his breath
shouting and cursing; he just ran. Two girls going
down to the stream saw a man running up the slope
towards them pursued by a stark-naked madman.
They threw down their pots and fled, screaming.
When Nwibe emerged into the full glare of the
highway he could not see his cloth clearly any more
and his chest was on the point of exploding from the
fire and torment within. But he kept running. He was
only vaguely aware of crowds of people on all sides and
he appealed to them tearfully without stopping: "Hold
the madman, he's got my cloth!" By this time the man
with the cloth was practically lost among the much
denser crowds far in front so that the link between
him and the naked man was no longer clear.
Now Nwibe continually bumped against people's
backs and then laid flat a frail old man struggling with
a stubborn goat on a leash. "Stop the madman," he
shouted hoarsely, his heart tearing to shreds, "he's got
my cloth!" Everyone looked at him first in surprise
and then less surprise because strange sights are
common in a great market. Some of them even
laughed.
"They've got his cloth he says."
"That's a new one I'm sure. He hardly looks mad
yet. Doesn't he have people, I wonder."
"People are so careless these days. Why can't they
keep proper watch over their sick relation, especially
on the day of the market?"
Farther up the road on the very brink of the marketplace two men from Nwibe's village recognized him
and, throwing down the one his long basket of yams,
the other his calabash of palm-wine held on a loop, gave desperate chase, to stop him setting foot irrevocably within the occult territory of the powers of the
market. But it was in vain. When finally they caught
him it was well inside the crowded square. Udenkwo
in tears tore off her top-cloth which they draped on
him and led him home by the hand. He spoke just once
about a madman who took his cloth in the stream.
"It is all right," said one of the men in the tone of a
father to a crying child. They led and he followed
blindly, his heavy chest heaving up and down in silent
weeping. Many more people from his village, a few of
his in-laws and one or two others from his mother's
place had joined the grief-stricken party. One man
whispered to another that it was the worst kind of
madness, deep and tongue-tied.
"May it end ill for him who did this," prayed the
other.

much."

"Can you do nothing at all then, not even to untie his
tongue?"
"Nothing can be done. They have already embraced
him. It is like a man who runs away from the
oppression of his fellows to the grove of an alusi and
says to him: Take me, oh spirit, I am your osu. No man
can touch him thereafter. He is free and yet no power
can break his bondage. He is free of men but bonded to
a god."
The second doctor was not as famous as the first and
not so strict. He said the case was bad, very bad
indeed, but no one folds his anns because the condition
of his child is beyond hope. He must still grope around
and do his best. His hearers nodded in eager agreement. And then he muttered into his own inward ear:
If doctors were to send away every patient whose cure
they were uncertain of, how many of them would eat
one meal in a whole week from their practice?
Nwibe was cured of his madness. That humble
practitioner who did the miracle became overnight the
most celebrated mad-doctor of his generation. They
called him Sojourner to the Land of the Spirits. Even
so it remains true that madness may indeed sometimes depart but never with all his clamorous train.
Some of these always remain-the trailers of madness
you might call them-to haunt the doorway of the
eyes. For how could a man be the same again of whom
witnesses from all the lands of Olu and Igbo have once
reported that they saw today a fine, hefty man in his
prime, stark naked, tearing through the crowds to
answer the call of the market-place? Such a man is
marked for ever.

"Yes, 1 know. It happens that way sometimes. And
they are the ones that medicine will not reach. 1
know."

Nwibe became a quiet, withdrawn man avoiding
whenever he could the boisterous side of the life of his


The first medicine-man his relatives consulted refused
to take him on, out of some kind of integrity.
"I could say yes to you and take your money," he
said. "But that is not my way. My powers of cure are
known throughout Olu and Igbo but never have 1
professed to bring back to life a man who has sipped
the spirit-waters of ani-mmQ. It is the same with a
madman who of his own accord delivers himself to the
divinities of the market-place. You should have kept
better watch over him."
"Don't blame us too much," said Nwibe's relative.
"When he left home that morning his senses were as
complete as yours and mine now. Don't blame us too


people. Two years later, before another initiation
season, he made a new inquiry about joining the
community of titled men in his town. Had they
received him perhaps he might have become at least
partially restored, but those QZQ men, dignified and
polite as ever, deftly steered the conversation away to
other matters.



Chike's School Days

Sarah's last child was a boy, and his birth brought
great joy to the house of his father, Amos. The child
received three names at his baptism~ohn , Chike,
Obiajulu. The last name means "the mind at last is at
rest." Anyone hearing this name knew at once that its
owner was either an only child or an only son. Chike
was an only son. His parents had had five daughters
before him.
Like his sisters Chike was brought up "in the ways
of the white man," which meant the opposite of
traditional. Amos had many years before bought a
tiny bell with which he summoned his family to
prayers and hymn-singing first thing in the morning
and last thing at night. This was one of the ways of the
white man. Sarah taught her children not to eat in
their neighbours' houses because "they offered their
food to idols." And thus she set herself against the
age-old custom which regarded children as the common responsibility of all so that, no matter what the

relationship between parents, their children played
together and shared their food.
One day a neighbour offered a piece of yam to
Chike, who was only four years old. The boy shook his
head haughtily and said, "We don't eat heathen food."
The neighbour was full of rage, but she controlled
herself and only muttered under her breath that even
an Om was full of pride nowadays, thanks to the white
man.
And she was right. In the past an Osu could not
raise his shaggy head in the presence of the free-born.
He was a slave to one of the many gods of the clan. He
was a thing set apart, not to be venerated but to be
despised and almost spat on. He could not marry a
free-born, and he could not take any of the titles of his
clan. When he died, he was buried by his kind in the
Bad Bush.
Now all that had changed, or had begun to change.
So that an Osu child could even look down his no e at a
free-born, and talk about heathen food! The white man
had indeed accomplished many things.
Chike's father was not originally an Osu, but had
gone and married an Osu woman in the name of
Christianity. It was unheard of for a man to make
himself Osu in that way, with his eyes wide open. But
then Amos was nothing if not mad. The new religion
had gone to his head. It was like palm-wine. Some
people drank it and remained ensible. Others lost
every sense in their stomach.
The only person who supported Amos in his mad
marriage venture was Mr. Brown, the white missionary, who lived in a thatch-roofed, red-earth-walled
parsonage and was highly respected by the people, not
because of his sermons, but because of a dispensary he
ran in one of his rooms. Amos had emerged from

Mr. Brown's parsonage greatly fortified. A few days
later he told his widowed mother, who had recently
been converted to Christianity and had taken the
name of Elizabeth. The shock nearly killed her. When
she recovered, she went down on her knees and
begged Amos not to do this thing. But he would not
hear; his ears had been nailed up. At last, in desperation, Elizabeth went to consult the diviner.
This diviner was a man of great power and wisdom.
As he sat on the floor of his hut beating a tortoise
shell, a coating of white chalk round his eyes, he saw
not only the present, but also what had been and what
was to be. He was called ''the man of the four eyes."
As soon as old Elizabeth appeared, he cast his
stringed cowries and told her what she had come to
see him about. "Your son has joined the white man's
religion. And you too in your old age when you should
know better. And do you wonder that he is stricken
with insanity? Those who gather ant-infested faggots
must be prepared for the visit of lizards." He cast his
cowries a number of times and wrote with a finger on a
bowl of sand, and all the while his nwifulu, a talking
calabash, chatted to itself. "Shut up!" he roared, and it
immediately held its peace. The diviner then muttered
a few incantations and rattled off a breathless reel of
proverbs that followed one another like the cowries in
his magic string.
At last he pronounced the cure. The ancestors
were angry and must be appeased with a goat. Old
Elizabeth performed the rites, but her son remained
insane and married an Osu girl whose name was
Sarah. Old Elizabeth renounced her new religion and
returned to the faith of her people.
We have wandered from our main story. But it is


important to know how Chike's father became an Osu,
because even today when everything is upside down,
such a story is very rare. But now to return to Chike
who refused heathen food at the tender age of four
years, or maybe five.
1\\10 years later he went to the village school. His
right hand could now reach across his head to his left
ear, which proved that he was old enough to tackle the
mysteries of the white man's learning. He was very
happy about his new slate and pencil, and especially
about his school unifonn of white shirt and brown
khaki shorts. But as the first day of the new tenn
approached, his young mind dwelt on the many stories
about teachers and their canes. And he rememebered
the song his elder sisters sang, a song that had a
somewhat disquieting refrain:

It did not matter to t heir dancing that in the
twentieth century Caesar was no longer ruler of the
whole world.
And sometimes they even sang in English. Chike
was very fond of "Ten Green Bottles." They had been
taught the words but they only remembered the first
and the last lines. The middle was hummed and hie-ed
and mumbled:

Onye nkuzi ewelu itali piagbusie umuaka.
One of the ways an emphasis is laid in Ibo is by
exaggeration, so that the teacher in the refrain might
not actually have flogged the children to death. But
there was no doubt he did flog them. And Chike
thought very much about it.
Being so young, Chike was sent to what was called
the "religious class" where they sang, and sometimes
danced, the catechism. He loved the sound of words
and he loved rhythm. During the catechism lesson the
class fonned a ring to dance the teacher's question.
"Who was Caesar?" he might ask, and the song would
burst forth with much stamping of feet.

Siza bu eze Rome
Onye nachi enu uwa dum.
Ten grin botr angin on dar war,
Ten grin botr angin on dar war,
Hm hm hm hm hm
Hm, hm hm hm hm hm,
An ten grin botr angin on dar war.
In this way the first year passed. Chike was
promoted to the "Infant School," where work of a
more serious nature was undertaken.
We need not follow him through the Infant School.
It would make a full story in itself. But it was no
different from the story of other children. In the
Primary School, however, his individual character
began to show. He developed a strong hatred for
arithmetic. But he loved stories and songs. And he
liked particularly the sound of English words, even
when they conveyed no meaning at all. Some of them
simply IDled him with elation. "Periwinkle" was such a
word. He had now forgotten how he learned it or
exactly what it was. He had a vague private meaning
for it and it was something to do with fairyland.
"Constellation" was another.
Chike's teacher was fond of long words. He was said
to be a very learned man. His favourite pastime was
copying out jaw-breaking words from his Chambers'
Etymological Dictionary. Only the other day he had

raised applause from his class by demolishing a boy's
excuse for lateness with unanswerable erudition. He
had said: "Procrastination is a lazy man's apology."
The teacher's erudition showed itself in every subject
he taught. His nature study lessons were memorable.
Chike would always remember the lesson on the
methods of seed dispersal. According to teacher, there
were five methods: by man, by animals, by water, by
wind, and by explosive mechanism. Even those pupils
who forgot all the other methods remembered "explosive mechanism."
Chike was naturally impressed by teacher's explosive vocabulary. But the fairyland quality which words
had for him was of a different kind. The first sentences
in his New Method R eader were simple enough and
yet they filled him with a vague exultation: "Once
there was a wizard. He lived in Africa. He went to
China to get a lamp. " Chike read it over and over
again at home and then made a song of it. It was a
meaningless song. "Periwinkles" got into it, and also
"Damascus." But it was like a window through which
he saw in the distance a strange, magical new world .
And he was happy.


The Sacrificial Egg

Julius Obi sat gazing at his typewriter. The fat Chief
Clerk, his boss, was snoring at his table. Outside, the
gatekeeper in his green uniform was sleeping at his
post. You couldn't blame him; no customer had passed
through the gate for nearly a week. There was an
empty basket on the giant weighing machine. A few
palm-kernels lay desolately in the dust around the
machine. Only the flies remained in strength.
Julius went to the window that overlooked the great
market on the bank of the River Niger. This market,
though still called Nkwo, had long spilled over into
Eke, Oye, and AfQ with the coming of civilization and
the growth of the town into the big palm-oil port. In
spite of this encroachment, however, it was still
busiest on its original Nkwo day, because the deity
who had presided over it from antiquity still cast her
spell only on her own day-let men in their greed spill
over themselves. It was said that she appeared in the
form of an old woman in the centre of the market just

before cock-crow and waved her magic fan in the four
directions of the earth-in front of her, behind her, to
the right and to the left-to draw to the market men
and women from distant places. And they came
bringing the produce of their lands-palm-oil and
kernels, cola nuts, cassava, mats, baskets and earthenware pots; and took home many-coloured cloths,
smoked fish, iron pots and plates. These were the
forest peoples. The other half of the world who lived
by the great rivers came down also-by canoe, bringing yams and fish. Sometimes it was a big canoe with a
dozen or more people in it; sometimes it was a lone
fisherman and his wife in a small vessel from the swiftflowing Anambara. They moored their canoe on the
bank and sold their fish, after much haggling. The
woman then walked up the steep banks of the river to
the heart of the market to buy salt and oil and, if the
sales had been very good, even a length of cloth. And
for her children at home she 'bought bean cakes and
mai-mai which the Igara women cooked. As evening
approached, they took up their paddles again and
paddled away, the water shimmering in the sunset and
their canoe becoming smaller and smaller in the
distance until it was just a dark crescent on the
water's face and two dark bodies swaying forwards
and backwards in it. Umuru then was the meeting
place of the forest people who were called Igbo and the
alien river folk whom the Igbo called Olu and beyond
whom the world stretched in indefiniteness.
Julius Obi was not a native of Umuru. He had come
like countless others from some bush village inland.
Having passed his Standard Six in a mission school he
had come to Umuru to work as a clerk in the offices of
the all-powerful European trading company which
bought palm-kernels at its own price and cloth and

metalware, also at its own price. The offices were
situated beside the famous market so that in his first
two or three weeks Julius had to learn to work within
its huge enveloping hum. Sometimes when the Chief
Clerk was away he walked to the window and looked
down on the vast anthill activity. Most of these people
were not here yesterday, he thought, and yet the
market had been just as full. There must be many,
many people in the world to be able to fill the market
day after day like this. Of course they say not all who
came to the great market were real people. Janet's
mother, Ma, had said so.
"Some of the beautiful young women you see
squeezing through the crowds are not people like you
or me but mammy-wota who have their town in the
depths of the river," she said. "You can always tell
them, because they are beautiful with a beauty that is
too perfect and too cold. You catch a glimpse of her
with the tail of your eye, then you blink and look
properly, but she has already vanished in the crowd."
Julius thought about these things as he now stood at
the window looking down on the silent, empty market.
Who would have believed that the great boisterous
market could ever be quenched like this? But such was
the strength of Kitikpa, the incarnate power of
smallpox. Only he could drive away all those people
and leave the market to the flies.
When Umuru was a little village, there was an
agegrade who swept its market-square every Nkwo
day. But progress had turned it into a busy, sprawling,
crowded and dirty river port, a no-man's-land where
strangers outnumbered by far the sons of the soil, who
could do nothing about it except shake their heads at
this gross perversion of their prayer. For indeed they
had prayed-who will blame them-for their town to


grow and prosper. And it had grown. But there is good
growth and there is bad growth. The belly does not
bulge out only with food and drink; it might be the
abominable diseru;e which would end by sending its
sufferer out of the house even before he was fully
dead.
The strangers who came to Umuru came for trade
and money, not in search of duties to perform, for they
had those in plenty back home in their village which
was real home.
And as if this did not suffice, the young sons and
daughters of Umuru soil, encouraged by schools and
churches were behaving no better than the strangers.
They neglected all their old tasks and kept only the
revelries.
Such was the state of the town when Kitikpa came
to see it and to demand the sacrifice the inhabitants
owed the gods of the soil. He came in confident
knowledge of the terror he held over the people. He
was an evil deity, and boasted it. Lest he be offended
those he killed were not killed but decorated, and no
one dared weep for them. He put an end to the coming
and going between neighbours and between Villages.
They said, "Kitikpa is in that village," and immediately it was cut off by its neighbours.
Julius was sad and worried because it was almost a
week since he had seen Janet, the girl he was going to
marry. Ma had explained to him very gently that he
should no longer go to see them "until this thing is
over, by the power of Jehovah." (Ma was a very
devout Christian convert and one reason why she
approved of Julius for her only daughter was that he
sang in the choir of the CMS church.)
"You must keep to your rooms," she had said in
hushed tones, for Kitikpa strictly forbade any noise or


boisterousness. "You never know whom you might
meet on the streets. That family has got it." She
lowered her voice even more and pointed surreptitiously at the house across the road whose doorway
was barred with a yellow palm-frond. "He has decorated one of them already and the rest were moved
away today in a big government Ion),."
Janet walked a short way with Julius and stopped;
so he stopped too. They seemed to have nothing to say
to each other yet they lingered on. Then she said
goodnight and he said goodnight. And they shook
hands, which was very odd, as though parting for the
night were something new and grave.
He did not go straight home, because he wanted
desperately to cling, even alone, to this strange
parting. Being educated he was not afraid of whom he
might meet, so he went to the bank of the river and
just walked up and down it. He must have been there
a long time because he was still there when the
wooden gong of the night-mask sounded. He immediately set out for home, half-walking and halfrunning, for night-masks were not a matter of superstition; they were real. They chose the night for their
revelry because like the bat's their ugliness was great.
In his hurry he stepped on something that broke
with a slight liquid explosion. He stopped and peeped
down at the footpath. The moon was not up yet but
there was a faint light in the sky which showed that it
would not be long delayed. In this half-light he saw
that he had stepped on an egg offered in sacrifice.
Someone oppressed by misfortune had brought the
offering to the crossroads in the dusk. And he had
stepped on it. There were the usual young palmfronds around it. But Julius saw it differently as a
house where the terrible artist was at work. He wiped


the sole of his foot on the sandy path and hurried
away, carrying another vague worry in his mind. But
hurrying was no use now; the fleet-footed mask was
already abroad. Perhaps it was impelled to hurry by
the threatening imminence of the moon. Its voice rose
high and clear in the still night air like a flaming
sword. It was yet a long way away, but Julius knew
that distances vanished before it. So he made straight
for the cocoyam farm beside the road and threw
himself on his belly, in the shelter of the broad leaves.
He had hardly done this when he heard the rattling
staff of the spirit and a thundering stream of esoteric
speech. He shook allover. The sounds came bearing
down on him, almost pressing his face into the moist
earth. And now he could hear the footsteps. It was as
if twenty evil men were running together. Panic sweat
broke all over him and he was nearly impelled to get
up and run. Fortunately he kept a firm hold on himself . . . In no time at all the commotion in the air
and on the earth-the thunder and torrential rain, the
earthquake and flood-passed and disappeared in the
distance on the other side of the road.
The next morning at the office, the Chief Clerk, a
son of the soil spoke bitterly about last night's
provocation of Kitikpa by the headstrong youngsters
who had launched the noisy fleet-footed mask in
defiance of their elders, who knew that Kitikpa would
be enraged, and then . . .
The trouble was that the disobedient youths had
never yet experienced the power of Kitikpa themselves; they had only heard of it. But soon they would
learn.
As Julius stood at the window looking out on the
emptied market he lived through the terror of that
night again. It was barely a week ago but already it

seemed like another life, separated from the present
by a vast emptiness. This emptiness deepened with
every passing day. On this side of it stood Julius, and
on the other Ma and Janet whom the dread artist decorated.


